p.461
CHAPTER 5
HOMICIDE
A. INTRODUCTION

One may ask two kinds of questions about any category of crime. The first is a question of criminality: What distinguishes criminal from non-criminal behavior? The second is a question of grading: What factors warrant greater or lesser
punishment when behavior qualifies as criminal? In the preceding chapter on rape, we dealt primarily with the first question. In this chapter, we deal primarily with the second. The distinction between criminal and non-criminal homicide usually
turns on such issues as causation, self-defense, insanity, etc. We will deal separately with these issues in later chapters because they arise for many different kinds of crimes. The principal focus of the present chapter is on the severity of punish-
ment authorized for homicides that are criminal.

Conventional public thinking about criminal law understandably concentrates on the threshold question of guilt versus innocence. The severity of the sentence is obviously important too, but we are less accustomed to thinking of this
issue as one governed by rigorous legal analysis. Yet the stakes in determining the degree of punishment are always high and nowhere more so than when a victim has died. Homicide that seems a product of mere carelessness or extraordinary
provocation is often punished by no more than a fine or a few months in jail; at the other extreme, some defendants who kill incur the death penalty or imprisonment for life with no possibility for parole. A society under the rule of law must have
clear, objective ways for choosing between these dramatically different alternatives (and the many that fall in between).

Legislative grading is accomplished by dividing homicidal conduct into crimes of different names (murder and manslaughter) and by dividing the same crime into different degrees (first-degree and second-degree murder). Following the
historical and statutory materials in this introductory section, Section B considers the grading of intended killings and Section C examines the grading of unintended killings. Section C also considers the distinction between involuntary manslaugh-
ter and wrongful killings that are not subject to criminal punishment at all. With that last exception, however, the behavior in this chapter is always a crime of some sort; the central concern is to determine how much punishment can be imposed.
And in addressing that issue, the law has traditionally been preoccupied with two distinct problems. The first, and most obvious, is a substantive problem — which facts determine whether punishment will be more severe. The second problem,
though less obvious, is often equally important for lawyers; this is the institutional

p.461
462
problem — which decision-making institution (for example, trial judge or jury) has authority to make the controlling assessment of these facts.
Report of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment, 1945-1953

25-28 (1953)
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF THE LAW OF MURDER IN ENGLAND

72. Homicide is the killing of a human being by a human being. Unlawful homicide may be murder, manslaughter, suicide or infanticide. Murder and manslaughter are felonies at common law and are not defined by statute. The tradi-
tional definition or description of murder . . . is in common practice often . . . briefly defined as “unlawful killing with ‘malice aforethought’ ”; while manslaughter is defined as “unlawful killing without ‘malice aforethought.’” .. .

74, The meaning of “malice aforethought,” which is the distinguishing criterion of murder, is certainly not beyond the range of controversy. The first thing that must be said about it is that neither of the two words is used in its ordinary
sense: the phrase “malice aforethought” is now a highly technical term of art. “It is now only an arbitrary symbol. For the ‘malice’ may have in it nothing really malicious; and need never be really ‘aforethought,’ except in the sense that every desire
must necessarily come before — though perhaps only an instant before — the act which is desired. The word ‘aforethought,’ in the definition, has thus become either false or else superfluous. The word ‘malice’ is neither; but it is apt to be mislead-
ing, for it is not employed in its original (and its popular) meaning.” “Malice aforethought” is simply a comprehensive name for a number of different mental attitudes which have been variously defined at different stages in the development of the
law, the presence of any one of which in the accused has been held by the courts to render a homicide particularly heinous and therefore to make it murder. . . .

75. We must now consider how “malice aforethought” came to be the distinctive element of murder and to bear such a meaning as is given to it at the present time. . .. It is sufficient to say here that “murder” originally meant a “secret
killing” and only gradually, from the fourteenth century onwards, came to be the name of the worst form of homicide characterised by “malice prepense” or “malice aforethought.” . . . It seems clear that at this period and for sometime afterwards
“malice prepense” or “malice aforethought” was understood to mean a deliberate, premeditated intent to kill formed some time beforehand, and that no killing “on a sudden,” even without provocation or on slight provocation, was considered
to be murder. In effect the law regarded unlawful killings as being of only two kinds — killing with malice forethought and killing on a sudden quarrel. Experience showed, however, that this view was much too simple and the definitions founded
upon it inadequate. There were many kinds of killing which should clearly be considered unlawful but which did not fall into either of these categories, and many such cases seemed to deserve the extreme penalty although the offender had no
premeditated desire to kill his victim. During the last four centuries the meaning to be given to the term “malice aforethought” has been affected by the changes in the conception of mens rea as a necessary ingredient in criminal liability at common
law for all crimes. The

p.462

p.469
courts and the writers of legal textbooks have responded to this change by giving to “malice aforethought” a wider and more technical meaning. As Stephen put it, “the loose term ‘malice’ was used, and then when a particular state of mind came
under their notice, the Judges called it ‘malice’ or not, according to their view of the propriety of hanging particular people. That is, in two words, the history of the definition of murder.” There can be no doubt that the term now covers, and has for
long covered, all the most heinous forms of homicide, as well as some cases — those of “constructive murder” — whose inclusion in the category of murder has often been criticised.

76. Thus the following propositions are commonly accepted:

() Itis murder if one person kills another with intent to do so, without provocation or on slight provocation, although there is no premeditation in the ordinary sense of the word.

(i It is murder if one person is killed by an act intended to kill another.

(ii) It is murder if a person is killed by an act intended to kill, although not intended to kill any particular individual, as if a man throws a bomb into a crowd of people.

(iv) It is murder if death results from an act which is intended to do no more than cause grievous bodily harm. An early example may be found in the case of Grey, where a blacksmith, who had had words with an apprentice, struck him
on the head with an iron bar and killed him. It was held that it “is all one as if he had run him through with a sword” and he was found guilty of murder.

(V) Itis murder if one person kills another by an intentional act which he knows to be likely to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm, although he may not intend to kill or to cause grievous bodily harm and may either be recklessly indiffer-
ent as to the results of his act or may even desire that no harm should be caused by it.

California Penal Code (2021)
Section 187. Murder Defined
(a) Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being, or a fetus, with malice aforethought. . . .
Section 188. Malice Defined
[Mlalice may be express or implied.
p.469
Tee 68
(1) Malice is express when there is manifested a deliberate intention to unlawfully take away the life of a fellow creature.
(2) Malice is implied when no considerable provocation appears, or when the circumstances attending the killing show an abandoned and malignant heart. . .
Section 189. Degrees of Murder...

(a) All murder that is perpetrated by means of a destructive device or explosive, a weapon of mass destruction, knowing use of ammunition designed primarily to penetrate metal or armor, poison, lying in wait, torture, or
by any other kind of willful, deliberate, and premeditated killing, or that is committed in the perpetration of, or attempt to perpetrate, arson, rape, carjacking, robbery, burglary, mayhem, kidnapping, train wrecking, or any act punish-
able under Section 206, 286, 287, 288, or 289 [prohibiting various forcible sexual acts and certain sexual acts with minors], . .. , or murder that is perpetrated by means of discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle, intentionally at
another person outside of the vehicle with intent to inflict death, is murder of the first degree [punishable by death or imprisonment for life without possibility of parole where special enumerated circumstances exist, or imprisonment
for 25 years to life].

(b) All other kinds of murders are of the second degree [punishable by imprisonment for 15 years to life, or a greater sentence where the victim was a peace officer engaged in the performance of his or her duties.) . . .

(a) To prove the killing was “deliberate and premeditated,” it is not be necessary to prove the defendant maturely and meaningfully reflected upon the gravity of the defendant's act.

() A participant in the perpetration or attempted perpetration of a felony listed in subdivision (a) in which a death occurs is liable for murder only if one of the following is proven:

(1) The person was the actual killer.

(2) The person was not the actual killer, but, with the intent to kill, aided, abetted, counseled, commanded, induced, solicited, requested, or assisted the actual killer in the commission of murder in the first
degree.

(3) The person was a major participant in the underlying felony and acted with reckless indifference to human life. .. .

(£) Subdivision (e) does not apply to a defendant when the victim is a peace officer who was killed while in the course of the peace officer's duties, where the defendant knew or reasonably should have known that the

victim was a peace officer engaged in the performance of the peace officer's duties.
Section 192. Manslaughter
Manslaughter is the unlawful killing of a human being without malice. It is of three kinds:
(a) VoLunTary — upon a sudden quarrel or heat of passion. [Punishable by imprisonment for three, six, or 11 years.]
(b) InvotunTary — in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony; or in the commission of a lawful act which might produce death, in an unlawful manner, or without due caution and circumspection. This

p.464
p. 465
subdivision shall not apply to acts committed in the driving of a vehicle. [Punishable by imprisonment for two, three, or four years.]
(c) VEHICULAR —
(1)... driving a vehicle in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony, and with gross negligence; or driving a vehicle in the commission of a lawful act which might produce death, in an un-
lawful manner, and with gross negligence. [Punishable by up to one year in county jail or imprisonment for two, four, or six years.]
(2) Driving a vehicle in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony, but without gross negligence; or driving a vehicle in the commission of a lawful act which might produce death, in an unlaw-
ful manner, but without gross negligence. [Punishable by a county jail term not to exceed one year]...
(d) This section shall not be construed as making any homicide in the driving of a vehicle punishable that is not a proximate result of the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to felony, or of the commission of a
lawful act which might produce death, in an unlawful manner.
(e) “Gross negligence,” as used in this section, does not prohibit or preclude a charge of murder under Section 188 upon facts exhibiting wantonness and a conscious disregard for life to support a finding of implied mal-
ice, or upon facts showing malice, consistent with the holding of the California Supreme Court in People v. Watson, 30 Cal. 3d 290.
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, Title 18 (2021)
Section 2501. Criminal Homicide
(a) OFFENSE DEFINED. — A person is guilty of criminal homicide if he intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or negligently causes the death of another human being.
(b) CLassiFication. — Criminal homicide shall be classified as murder, voluntary manslaughter, or involuntary manslaughter.
Section 2502. Murder
(a) MurDER oF THE First DeGREE. — A criminal homicide constitutes murder of the first degree when it is committed by an intentional killing. [Punishable by death or life imprisonment]
(b) MurDeR oF THE SECOND DEGREE. — A criminal homicide constitutes murder of the second degree when it is committed while defendant was engaged as a principal or an accomplice in the perpetration of a felony. [Pun-
ishable by life imprisonment.]
p. 465
p. 466
(c) MurDER OF THE THIRD DEGREE. — All other kinds of murder shall be murder of the third degree. Murder of the third degree is a felony of the first degree. [Punishable by maximum of 20 years.]
(d) Derinimions. — As used in this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given to them in this subsection: . . .
“Intentional killing.” Killing by means of poison, or by lying in wait, or by any other kind of willful, deliberate and premeditated killing.
“Perpetration of a felony.” The act of the defendant in engaging in or being an accomplice in the commission of, or an attempt to commit, or flight after committing, or attempting to commit robbery, rape, or
deviate sexual intercourse by force or threat of force, arson, burglary or kidnapping. . . .
Section 2503. Voluntary Manslaughter

(a) GENERAL RULE. — A person who kills an individual without lawful justification commits voluntary manslaughter if at the time of the killing he is acting under a sudden and intense passion resulting from serious provoca-
tion by:
(1) the individual killed; or
(2) another whom the actor endeavors to kill, but he negligently or accidentally causes the death of the individual Killed.
(b) UNREASONABLE BELIEF KILLING JUSTIFIABLE. — A person who intentionally or knowingly kills an individual commits voluntary manslaughter if at the time of the killing he believes the circumstances to be such that, if they
existed, would justify the killing under Chapter 5 of this title, but his belief is unreasonable.
(c) Gravina. — Voluntary manslaughter is a felony of the first degree. [20-year maximum,]
Section 2504. Involuntary Manslaughter
(a) GENERAL RULE. — A person is guilty of involuntary manslaughter when as a direct result of the doing of an unlawful act in a reckless or grossly negligent manner, or the doing of a lawful act in a reckless or grossly neg-
ligent manner, he causes the death of another person.
(b) Graoine. — Involuntary manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree. .. . [Five-year maximum,]
Section 2505. Causing or Aiding Suicide
(a) Causine SuiciDE As CRIMINAL HomiciDe. — A person may be convicted of criminal homicide for causing another to commit suicide only if he intentionally causes such suicide by force, duress, or deception.
(b) AIDING OR SOLICITING SUICIDE AS AN INDEPENDENT OFFENSE. — A person who intentionally aids or solicits another to commit suicide is guilty of a felony of the second degree if his conduct causes such suicide or an at-
tempted suicide, and otherwise of a misdemeanor of the second degree. [Two-year maximum.]
p. 466
p.467
New York Penal Law (2021)
Section 125.00. Homicide Defined
Homicide means conduct which causes the death of a person . . . under circumstances constituting murder, manslaughter in the first degree, manslaughter in the second degree, [or] criminally negligent homicide. . . .
Section 125.10. Criminally Negligent Homicide
A person is guilty of criminally negligent homicide when, with criminal negligence, he causes the death of another person.
Criminally negligent homicide is a class E felony. [Four-year maximum.]
Section 125.15. Manslaughter in the Second Degree
Apperson is guilty of manslaughter in the second degree when:
1. He recklessly” causes the death of another person; or. ..
3. He intentionally? causes or aids another person to commit suicide.
Manslaughter in the second degree is a class C felony. [15-year maximum.]

Section 125.20. Manslaughter in the First Degree
A person is guilty of manslaughter in the first degree when:
1. With intent to cause serious physical injury to another person, he causes the death of such person or of a third person; or
2. With intent to cause the death of another person, he causes the death of such person or of a third person under circumstances which do not constitute murder because he acts under the influence of extreme emotional
disturbance, as defined in paragraph (a) of subdivision one of section 125.25... .
Manslaughter in the first degree is a class B felony. [25-year maximum.]
Section 125.25. Murder in the Second Degree
A person is guilty of murder in the second degree when:
1. With intent to cause the death of another person, he causes the death of such person or of a third person; except that in any prosecution under this subdivision, it is an affirmative defense that:
(a)(i) The defendant acted under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance for which there was a reasonable explanation or excuse, the reasonableness of which is to be determined from the viewpoint
of a person in the defendant's situation under the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be... .
(ii) It shall not be a “reasonable explanation or excuse” pursuant to subparagraph (|) of this paragraph when the defendant's conduct resulted from
p.467
p. 468
the discovery, knowledge or disclosure of the victim's sexual orientation, sex, gender, gender identity, gender expression or sex assigned at birth; or
(b) The defendant's conduct consisted of causing or aiding, without the use of duress or deception, another person to commit suicide . . . ; or
2. Under circumstances evincing a depraved indifference to human life, he recklessly engages in conduct which creates a grave risk of death to another person, and thereby causes the death of another person; or
3. Acting either alone or with one or more other persons, he commits or attempts to commit robbery, burglary, kidnapping, arson, rape in the first degree, criminal sexual act in the first degree, sexual abuse in the first
degree, aggravated sexual abuse, escape in the first degree, or escape in the second degree, and, in the course of and in furtherance of such crime or of immediate flight therefrom, he, or another participant, if there be any, causes
the death of a person other than one of the participants; except that in any prosecution under this subdivision, in which the defendant was not the only participant in the underlying crime, it is an affirmative defense that the defendant:
(a) Did not commit the homicidal act or in any way solicit, request, command, importune, cause or aid the commission thereof; and
(b) Was not armed with a deadly weapon, or any instrument, article or substance readily capable of causing death or serious physical injury and of a sort not ordinarily carried in public places by law-abiding
persons; and
(c) Had no reasonable ground to believe that any other participant was armed with such a weapon, instrument, article or substance; and
(a) Had no reasonable ground to believe that any other participant intended to engage in conduct likely to result in death or serious physical injury. . .
Murder in the second degree is a class A-I felony. [Punishable by from 15 years to life imprisonment.]
Section 125.27. Murder in the First Degree
[Under this section, intentional killings that would be second-degree murder under §125.25(1) are raised to first-degree murder in special circumstances, such as when the victim is a police officer or an employee of a state or local
correctional institution, or when the crime is committed while a defendant is in custody serving a life sentence. First-degree murder is punishable by death, but at this writing New York no longer has a valid regime for imposing capital punishment]

Model Penal Code
Section 210.1 to 210.4
[See the Appendix in this book for text of this section.]
p. 468
p. 469
The Penal Code of Sweden?
Section 1
A person who takes the life of another person is guilty of murder and is sentenced to imprisonment for a fixed term of at least ten and at most eighteen years, or for life. As grounds for life imprisonment, particular consideration is given
to whether the act was preceded by careful planning, was characterized by particular cunning, aimed to promote or conceal other offences, involved severe suffering for the victim or was otherwise particularly ruthless.
Section 2
If, in view of the circumstances that led to the act or for other reasons, the crime mentioned in Section 1 is considered to be less grave, imprisonment for manslaughter shall be imposed for at least six and at most ten years. . . .
Section 7
A person who through carelessness causes the death of another shall be sentenced for causing another's death to imprisonment for at most two years or, if the crime is less grave, to pay a fine.
If the crime is gross, imprisonment shall be imposed for at least one year and at most six years.
When assessing whether the crime is gross, particular consideration is given to:
1. whether the act involved deliberate risk-taking of a serious kind; or
2. whether, when particular attention or skill was required, the perpetrator was under the influence of alcohol or some other substance or was otherwise guilty of neglect of a serious kind.
B. LEGISLATIVE GRADING OF INTENDED KILLINGS
1. The Premeditation-Deliberation Formula
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT TO §210.2 AT 16 (1980): Prior to the recodification effort begun by the Model Penal Code, most American jurisdictions maintained a law of murder built around . . . common-law [concepts].
The most significant departure was the division of murder into degrees, a change initiated by the Pennsylvania legislation of 1794. That statute provided that “all murder, which shall be perpetrated by means of poison, or by lying in wait, or by any
other kind of willful, deliberate and premeditated killing, or which shall be committed in the perpetration, or attempt to perpetrate any arson,
p.469
p.470
rape, robbery or burglary shall be deemed murder in the first degree; and all other kinds of murder shall be deemed murder in the second degree.” The thrust of this reform was to confine the death penalty, which was then mandatory on conviction
of any common-law murder, to homicides judged particularly heinous. Other states followed the Pennsylvania practice until at one time the vast majority of American jurisdictions differentiated degrees of murder and the term “first-degree murder”
passed into common parlance.
Commonwealth v. Carroll
‘Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
194 A.2d 911 (Pa. 1963)

BELL, C.J. The defendant, Carroll, pleaded guilty generally to an indictment charging him with the murder of his wife, and was tried by a judge without a jury. . .. The Court found him guilty of first-degree murder and sentenced him to life
imprisonment. [DJefendant took this appeal. The only questions involved are thus stated by the appellant:

[1] Does not the evidence sustain a conviction no higher than murder in the second degree?

[2] Does not the evidence of defendant's good character, together with the testimony of medical experts, including the psychiatrist for the Behavior Clinic of Allegheny County, that the homicide was not premed-

itated or intentional, require the Court below to fix the degree of guilt of defendant no higher than murder in the second degree?

The defendant married the deceased in 1955, when he was serving in the Army in California. Subsequently he was stationed in Alabama, and later in Greenland. During the latter tour of duty, defendant's wife and two children lived with
his parents in New Jersey. Because this arrangement proved incompatible, defendant returned to the United States on emergency leave in order to move his family to their own quarters. On his wife's insistence, defendant was forced first to secure
a “compassionate transfer” back to the States, and subsequently to resign from the Army in July of 1960, by which time he had attained the rank of Chief Warrant Officer. Defendant was a hard worker, earned a substantial salary and bore a very
good reputation among his neighbors.

In 1958, decedent-wife suffered a fractured skull while attempting to leave defendant's car in the course of an argument. Allegedly this contributed to her mental disorder which was later diagnosed as a schizoid personality type. In 1959
she underwent psychiatric treatment at the Mental Hygiene Clinic in Aberdeen, Maryland. She complained of nervousness and told the examining doctor “I feel like hurting my children.” This sentiment sometimes took the form of sadistic “disci-
pline” toward their very young children. Nevertheless, upon her discharge from the Clinic, the doctors considered her much improved. With this background we come to the immediate events of the crime.

In January, 1962, defendant was selected to attend an electronics school in Winston-Salem, North Carolina, for nine days. His wife greeted this news with

p.470
part

violent argument. Immediately prior to his departure for Winston-Salem, at the suggestion and request of his wife, he put a loaded .22 calibre pistol on the window sill at the head of their common bed, so that she would feel safe. On the evening of
January 16, 1962, defendant returned home and told his wife that he had been temporarily assigned to teach at a school in Chambersburg, which would necessitate his absence from home four nights out of seven for a ten week period. A violent
and protracted argument ensued at the dinner table and continued until four o'clock in the morning.

Defendant's own statement after his arrest details the final moments before the crime:

We went into the bedroom a little before 3 o'clock on Wednesday morning where we continued to argue in short bursts. Generally she laid with her back to me facing the wall in bed and would just talk over her shoulder to

me. | became angry and more angry especially what she was saying about my kids and myself, and sometime between 3 and 4 o'clock in the morning | remembered the gun on the window sill over my head. | think she had

dozed off. | reached up and grabbed the pistol and brought it down and shot her twice in the back of the head.2
Defendant's testimony at the trial elaborated this theme. He started to think about the children:

seeing my older son’s feet what happened to them. I could see the bruises on him and Michael's chin was split open, four stitches. I didn’t know what to do. | wanted to help my boys. Sometime in there she said something

in there, she called me some kind of name. | kept thinking of this. During this time | either thought or felt — | thought of the gun, just thought of the gun. | am not sure whether | felt my hand move toward the gun — I saw my

hand move, the next thing — the only thing I can recollect after that is right after the shots or right during the shots. | saw the gun in my hand just pointed at my wife's head. She was still lying on her back — | mean her side.

I could smell the gunpowder and | could hear something — it sounded like running water. I didn’t know what it was at first, didn’t realize what I'd done at first. Then | smelled it. I smelled blood before. . . .

Q: At the time you shot her, Donald, were you fully aware and intend to do what you did?

A: | don't know positively. All| remember hearing was two shots and feeling myself go cold all of a sudden.

Shortly thereafter defendant wrapped his wife's body in a blanket, spread and sheets, tied them on with a piece of plastic clothesline and took her down to the cellar. He tried to clean up as well as he could. That night he took his wife's
body, wrapped in a blanket with a rug over it to a desolate place near a trash dump. He then took the children to his parents’ home in Magnolia, New Jersey. He was

part
p.472
arrested the next Monday in Chambersburg where he had gone to his teaching assignment.

[Defendant contends] that the crime amounted only to second-degree murder and that his conviction should therefore be reduced to second degree or that a new trial should be granted. . ..

[The court then reviewed the Pennsylvania murder statute, which at the time divided murder into two degrees, in accordance with the formula adopted in 1794. That formula, still in effect for Pennsylvania in 1963 and followed in many
states to this day, is quoted above in the excerpt immediately preceding Carroll. ° Then, as now, first-degree murder included killings by poison, lying in wait, “or any other kind of willful, deliberate and premeditated killing.”]

The specific intent to kill which is necessary to constitute in a nonfelony murder, murder in the first degree, may be found from a defendant's words or conduct or from the attendant circumstances together with all reasonable inferences
therefrom, and may be inferred from the intentional use of a deadly weapon on a vital part of the body of another human being. . . .

If we consider only the evidence which is favorable to the Commonwealth, it is without the slightest doubt sufficient in law to prove first degree. However, even if we believe all of defendant's statements and testimony, there is no doubt
that this killing constituted murder in the first degree. Defendant first urges that there was insufficient time for premeditation in the light of his good reputation. This is based on an isolated and oft repeated statement in Commonwealth v. Drum,
58 Pa. 9, 16, that “ ‘no time is too short for a wicked man to frame in his mind the scheme of murder.’ ” Defendant argues that, conversely, a long time is necessary to find premeditation in a “good man.” We find no merit in defendant's analogy
or contention. As Chief Justice Maxey appropriately and correctly said in Commonwealth v. Earnest, 342 Pa. 544, 549-550, 21 A.2d 38, 40: “Whether the intention to kill and the killing, that is, the premeditation and the fatal act, were within a brief
space of time or a long space of time is immaterial if the killing was in fact intentional, wilful, deliberate and premeditated.” . . .

Defendant further contends that the time and place of the crime, the enormous difficulty of removing and concealing the body, and the obvious lack of an escape plan, militate against and make a finding of premeditation legally impos-
sible. This is a “jury argument”; it is clear as crystal that such circumstances do not negate premeditation. This contention of defendant is likewise clearly devoid of merit.

Defendant's most earnestly pressed contention is that the psychiatrist's opinion of what defendant's state of mind must have been and was at the time of the crime, clearly establishes not only the lack but also the legal impossibility of
premeditation. Dr. Davis, a psychiatrist . .. , testified that defendant was

for a number of years . . . passively going along with a situation which he [was] not controlling and he [was] not making any decisions, and finally a decision [was] forced on him. . . . He had left the military to take this assign-

ment, and he was averaging about nine thousand a year; he had a

p.472
p.473

good job. He knew that if he didn’t accept this teaching assignment in all probability he would be dismissed from the Government service, and at his age and his special training he didn’t know whether he would be able to

find employment. More critical to that was the fact that at this point, as we understand it, his wife issued an ultimatum that if he went and gave this training course she would leave him. . .. He was so dependent upon her he

didn’t want her to leave. He couldn't make up his mind what to do. He was trapped. . .

The doctor then gave his opinion that “rage,” “desperation,” and “panic” produced

an impulsive automatic reflex type of homicide, . . . as opposed to an intentional premeditated type of homicide, . . . Our feeling was that if this gun had fallen to the floor he wouldn't have been able to pick it up and consum-

mate that homicide. And | think if he had to load the gun he wouldn't have done it. This is a matter of opinion, but this is our opinion about it.

There are three answers to this contention. First, . .. neither a judge nor a jury has to believe all or any part of the testimony of the defendant or of any witness. Secondly, the opinion of the psychiatrists was based to a large extent upon
statements made to them by the defendant, which need not be believed and which are in some instances opposed by the facts themselves. Thirdly, a psychiatrist's opinion of a defendant's impulse or lack of intent or state of mind is, in this class.
of case, entitled to very little weight, and this is especially so when defendant's own actions, or his testimony or confession, or the facts themselves, belie the opinion. . . .

Defendant's own statement after his arrest, upon which his counsel so strongly relies, as well as his testimony at his trial, clearly convict him of first-degree murder. . . . From his own statements and from his own testimony, it is clear
that, terribly provoked by his allegedly nagging, belligerent and sadistic wife, defendant remembered the gun, deliberately took it down, and deliberately fired two shots into the head of his sleeping wife. There is no doubt that this was a willful, de-
liberate and premeditated murder.

While defendant makes no contention that he was insane at the commission of the murder or at any time, what this Court said in Commonwealth v. Tyrrell, 174 A.2d 852, 856-857, is equally appropriate here:

Defendant's psychiatrist did not testify that the defendant was insane. What he did say was that because defendant's wife frequently picked on him and just before the killing insulted or goaded him, defendant had an emo-

tional impulse to kill her which he could not resist. . . . [S]ociety would be almost completely unprotected from criminals if the law permitted a blind or irresistible impulse or inability to control one’s self, to excuse or justify

murder or to reduce it from first degree to second degree. In the times in which we are living, nearly every normal adult human being has moments or hours or days or longer periods when he or she is depressed and dis-

turbed with resultant emotional upset feelings and so-called blind impulses; and the young especially have many uncontrolled emotions every day which are euphemistically called irresistible

p.479
p.474

impulses. The Courts of Justice should not abdicate their function and duty of determining criminal responsibility to the psychiatrist. In such event, the test will differ not only with each psychiatrist but also with the prevailing

psychiatric winds of the moment. . .

Just as the Courts cannot abdicate to the psychiatrists the task of determining criminal responsibility in law, so also they cannot remit to psychiatrists the right to determine the intent or the state of mind of an accused at the time of the
commission of a homicide. . . .

Judgment and sentence affirmed.

State v. Guthrie
‘Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia
461 S.E.2d 163 (W. Va. 1995)

C.eckey, J.: The defendant, Dale Edward Guthrie, appeals the . . . jury verdict finding him guilty of first-degree murder [defined to include “any willful, deliberate and premeditated killing’). [He] was sentenced to serve a life sentence
with a recommendation of mercy. ..

It is... undisputed that on the evening of February 12, 1998, the defendant removed a knife from his pocket and stabbed his co-worker, Steven Todd Farley, in the neck and killed him. The two men worked together as dishwashers at
Danny's Rib House in Nitro and got along well together before this incident. On the night of the killing, the victim [and other employees] were joking around while working in the kitchen of the restaurant. The victim was poking fun at the defendant
who appeared to be ina bad mood. He told the defendant to “lighten up” and snapped him with a dishtowel several times. Apparently, the victim had no idea he was upsetting the defendant very much. The dishtowel flipped the defendant on the
nose and he became enraged.

The defendant removed his gloves and started toward the victim. Mr. Farley, still teasing, said: “Ooo, he’s taking his gloves off.” The defendant then pulled a knife from his pocket and stabbed the victim in the neck. He also stabbed Mr.
Farley in the arm as he fell to the floor. Mr. Farley looked up and cried: “Man, | was just kidding around.” The defendant responded: “Well, man, you should have never hit me in my face.” ..

Itis. .. undisputed that the defendant suffers from a host of psychiatric problems. He experiences up to two panic attacks daily and had received treatment for them . . . for more than a year preceding the killing. He suffers from chronic
depression (dysthymic disorder), an obsession with his nose (body dysmorphic disorder), and borderline personality disorder. The defendant's father shed some light on his nose fixation. He stated that dozens of times a day the defendant stared
in the mirror and tumed his head back and forth to look at his nose. . . . The defendant repeatedly asked for assurances that his nose was not too big. This obsession began when he was approximately seventeen years old. The defendant was
twenty-nine years old at the time of trial.

The defendant testified he suffered a panic attack immediately preceding the stabbing. He described the attack as “intense”; he felt a lot of pressure and his heart

p.474

p.476
beat rapidly. [He] could not understand why Mr. Farley was picking on him because he had never done that before. Even at trial, the defendant did not comprehend his utter overreaction to the situation. In hindsight, the defendant believed the
better decision would have been to punch out on his time card and quit over the incident. However, all the witnesses related that the defendant was in no way attacked, as he perceived it, but that Mr. Farley was playing around. The defendant
could not bring himself to tell the other workers to leave him alone or inform them about his panic attacks. . ..

The principal question before us . . . is whether our instructions on murder [are] wrong and confusing. . . . [T]he defendant argues [that] the instructions were . . . improper because the terms wilful, deliberate, and premeditated were
equated with a mere intent to kill. ..

State's Instruction No. 8, . . . stated:

The Court instructs the jury that to constitute a willful, deliberate and premeditated killing, it is not necessary that the intention to kill should exist for any particular length of time prior to the actual killing; it is only necessary

that such intention should have come into existence for the first time at the time of such killing, or at any time previously.

State's Instruction No. 10 stated: “ .. . in order to constitute a ‘premeditated’ murder an intent to kill need exist only for an instant.” State's Instruction No. 12 stated: . . . “[W]hat is meant by the language willful, deliberate and premedi-
tated is that the killing be intentional.” State's Instruction Nos. 10 and 12 are commonly referred to as Schrader instructions.

[At trial, defense counsel objected to these instructions, though under Schrader they were consistent with West Virginia law as it stood at the time. — Eos.]

The linchpin of the problems that flow from these instructions is the failure adequately to inform the jury of the difference between first- and second-degree murder. Of particular concern is the lack of guidance to the jury as to what
constitutes premeditation and the manner in which the instructions confuse premeditation with the intent to kill... .

[Within the parameters of our current homicide statutes [we believe that] the Schrader definition of premeditation and deliberation is confusing, if not meaningless. To allow the State to prove premeditation and deliberation by only
showing that the intention came “into existence for the first time at the time of such killing” completely eliminates the distinction between the two degrees of murder.2 Hence, we feel compelled in this case to attempt to make the dichotomy mean-
ingful by making some modifications to our homicide common law.

Premeditation and deliberation should be defined in a. .. way to give juries both guidance and reasonable discretion. Although premeditation and deliberation are not measured by any particular period of time, there must be some
period between the formation of the intent to kill and the actual killing, which indicates. . . . an opportunity for some reflection on the intention to kill after it is formed. The accused must kill purposely after contemplating the intent to kill. Although an
elaborate plan or scheme to take life is not required, our Schrader

p.476

p.476
instruction’s notion of instantaneous premeditation and momentary deliberation is not satisfactory for proof of first-degree murder. In Bullock v. United States, 122 F.2d 213, 214 [D.C. Cir. 1941], the court discussed the need to have some appre-
ciable time elapse between the intent to kill and the killing:

To speak of premeditation and deliberation which are instantaneous or which take no appreciable time, is a contradiction in terms. . . . Statutes like ours, which distinguish deliberate and premeditated murder from other

murder, reflect a belief that one who meditates an intent to kill and then deliberately executes it is more dangerous, more culpable or less capable of reformation than one who kills on sudden impulse; or that the prospect of

the death penalty is more likely to deter men from deliberate than from impulsive murder. The deliberate killer is guilty of first degree murder; the impulsive killer is not.

Thus, there must be some evidence that the defendant considered and weighed his decision to kill in order for the State to establish premeditation and deliberation under our first-degree murder statute. This is what is meant by a ruth-
less, cold-blooded, calculating killing. Any other intentional killing, by its spontaneous and nonreflective nature, is second-degree murder.

We are asked to overrule the language appearing in Schrader, as reflected in . . . State’s Instruction Nos. 10 and 12 [but we] find that Schrader wrongly equated premeditation with intent to kill. [W]e do not take lightly the policy under-
lying stare decisis. However, we believe: “Remaining true to an ‘intrinsically sounder’ doctrine established in prior cases better serves the values of stare decisis... . In such a situation ‘special justification’ exists to depart from the [more] recently
decided case.”

[Reversed and remanded for a new trial]

NOTES ON PREMEDITATION

1. Statutory interpretation. Roughly 29 states, D.C., and the federal government use the criterion of “premeditation” to identify the most serious murders; Carroll and Guthrie exemplify the differing approaches on how to interpret
the term. See Kimberly Kessler Ferzan, Plotting Premeditation’s Demise, 75 Law & Contemp. Probs. 83, 84 (2012); Matthew A. Pauley, Murder by Premeditation, 36 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 145 (1999).

(a) A majority of those using the premeditation test (roughly 16 jurisdictions) hold that it can be satisfied either an instant before or simultaneously with the act of homicide. Ferzan, supra, at 88. See, e.g., State v. Martin, 859 N.W.2d
600, 606 (S.D. 2015) (“premeditated design . . . may be formed instantly before committing the act”); Annot., 18 A.L.R.4th 961 (2021); Commonwealth v. Roche, 153 A.3d 1063, 1071 (Pa. 2017) (“the design to kill can be formulated in a fraction of a
second.”).

Consider Young v. State, 428 So. 2d 155, 158 (Ala. Crim. App. 1982). Defendant and his brother were playing cards with several friends when an argument and then a scuffle broke out. Defendant fired several shots, and two of the men
were hit; each died from a single .22 caliber shot to the chest. The court upheld defendant's conviction on two counts of first-degree murder. Stressing that “[no]

p.476

p.a77
appreciable space of time between the formation of the intention to kill and the act of killing” was required, the court said that “[p]remeditation and deliberation may be formed while the killer is ‘pressing the trigger that fired the fatal shot.’ ”
QUESTIONS: In jurisdictions that follow the Carroll approach, is there a difference between a premeditated intention to kill and an intention to kill without premeditation?

The Arizona Supreme Court does not think so. In an attempt to resolve difficulties in defining the premeditation element of first-degree murder, the Arizona legislature amended its statute as follows, Ariz. Rev. Stat. §13-1101(1):

Premeditation means that the defendant acts with either the intention or the knowledge that he will kill another human being, when such intention or knowledge precedes the killing by any length of time to permit reflection.

Proof of actual reflection is not required, but an act is not done with premeditation if it is the instant effect of a sudden quarrel or heat of passion.

In State v. Thompson, 65 P.3d 420 (Ariz. 2003), the Arizona Supreme Court could find no difference between intentional killings that are first-degree murders and those that are second-degree if “proof of actual reflection is not required.”
It therefore concluded that the statute was arbitrary and capricious and unconstitutional, in violation of due process. To save its constitutionality the court interpreted the statute to require proof of actual reflection.

(b) Because the Carroll approach in effect equates “premeditation” with any intent to kill, it eliminates any distinction between first- and second-degree murder when a killing is intentional. But is the Guthrie court correct in concluding
that this approach “completely eliminates the distinction between the two degrees of murder”? Is there any kind of unintentional killing that could demonstrate “malice” and thus qualify for a second-degree but not a first-degree conviction? Note
that common-law courts traditionally have considered a wide range of circumstances sufficient to establish “malice aforethought.” (See the summary of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment, pp. 462-463 supra.) In Pennsylvania, these un-
intentional murders are not eligible for designation as first-degree. Since the Carroll approach does preserve some distinction between first- and second-degree murder, is there any other reason to reject its interpretation of “premeditation”?

(©) The Guthrie approach distinguishes between mere intent to kill and intent plus premeditation, so as a matter of statutory interpretation it avoids rendering any statutory terms superfluous. But it raises two troublesome issues: What
kind of evidence is sufficient to establish this more substantial sort of premeditation? And how useful is this sort of premeditation as a basis for distinguishing the worst forms of murder?

Professor Jody Armour argues that the Carroll conception of “premeditation” is a “transparent fiction,” and that “premeditation” is not a fact that can be “found” but instead a “discretion-laden standard that can therefore enable the
racially-biased social construction of black criminals through jurors’ biased moral judgments.” Armour, Where Bias Lives in the Criminal Law and Its Processes: How Judges and Jurors Socially Construct Black Criminals, 45 Am. J. Crim. L. 203,
232, 242-243 (2018).

p.a77
p.478
QUESTIONS: Does the Guthrie standard escape the problem of potentially biased factfinding? What criteria could we use to more objectively identify the most serious (“first-degree”) killings?

2. Policy rationales. Is premeditation relevant because premeditated killings are more culpable, because they are harder to deter, or because planning activity can include precautions to reduce the risk of getting caught? See Michael
J. Zydney Mannheimer, Not the Crime But the Cover-Up: A Deterrence-Based Rationale for the Premeditation-Deliberation Formula, 86 Ind. LJ. 879 (2011). Which rationale is consistent with the result in Carroll? With the result in Guthrie?

3. Proof of premeditation. Jurisdictions that interpret “premeditation” to require actual reflection have to consider what kind of evidence is sufficient to support this finding, particularly when the accused has made no statements
indicating that the killing was the result of a preconceived plan. In a leading decision relied on in many jurisdictions, the California Supreme Court (People v. Anderson, 447 P.2d 942 (Cal. 1968)) explained that evidence sufficient to sustain a finding
of premeditation generally falls into three basic categories: (1) facts regarding the defendant's behavior prior to the killing that might indicate a design to take life (“planning” activity); (2) facts about the defendant's prior relationship with the victim
that might indicate a reason to kill (“motive”); and (3) evidence that “the manner of killing was so particular and exacting that the defendant must have intentionally killed according to a ‘preconceived design.’ ” The court added that “this court sus-
tains verdicts of first degree murder typically when there is evidence of all three types and otherwise requires at least extremely strong evidence of (1) or evidence of (2) in conjunction with either (1) or (3).”

Although the Guthrie court reversed the defendant's conviction because of the erroneous instruction, it found the evidence adequate to permit a properly instructed jury to find premeditation under the Anderson standard. On remand,
after the jury was instructed under the new test for premeditation, Guthrie was again convicted of first-degree murder and was sentenced to life in prison with the possibility of parole. As of November 2020, he apparently had not yet been granted
parole.1 Do you agree that the Anderson tests were met on the facts of Guthrie? Could they be met in the Carroll case?

In subsequent decisions, the California Supreme Court retreated from its view that a finding of premeditation requires particular types of evidence. Instead, the California court now maintains that no specific combination of these
classes of evidence is essential and that other types of evidence may also suffice. People v. Brooks, 396 P.3d 480, 524 (Cal. 2017).2 But other jurisdictions approve Anderson's suggestion that premeditation requires evidence falling in all three
categories or in the specified combinations of (1), (2), and (3). See, e.g., State v. Cox, 884 N.W.2d 400, 412-415 (Minn. 2016). In contrast, Michigan permits a finding of premeditation based only on evidence of “an interval of time between the initial
homicidal thought and ultimate action, which would allow a reasonable person time to subject

p.478

p.479
the nature of his or her action to a ‘second look.” People v. Oros, 917 N.W.2d 559, 566 (Mich. 2018). Is this approach more realistic than that of the Anderson criteria? Since the prosecution has to prove premeditation, how does evidence that the
defendant had time for a “second look” prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant actually took a second look"?

4, Identifying the worst murders. (a) The Anderson case referred to in the previous note involved the brutal murder of a ten-year-old girl. The victim’s brother and mother had returned home one afternoon to find blood on the living
room couch. The defendant (who was also living in the house) claimed first that he had cut himself and later that the victim had cut herself. Both claims proved false when the child's nude body was discovered in another room. Police later found
the defendant's blood-spotted clothing and a knife. The victim's bloodstained clothes were scattered throughout the house, and there was blood in almost every room except the kitchen, which appeared to have been mopped. Over 60 wounds,
extending over the victim's entire body, were found. Several of the wounds were post-mortem. The California Supreme Court reversed the first-degree murder conviction, finding this evidence insufficient to show premeditation: There was no
evidence that defendant planned the killing; nothing in his prior relationship with the victim revealed a motive; and the court said that the manner of killing (by multiple random knife wounds) suggested an explosion of violence rather than a precon-
ceived design to kill.

QUESTIONS: How do you explain the court's conclusion? If the result seems unacceptable, is that because the evidence did prove actual premeditation, or because actual premeditation is not an appropriate requirement for identifying the most
serious homicides?

(b) Consider State v. Forrest, 362 S.E.2d 252 (N.C. 1987). The defendant took a pistol with him on a visit to his hospitalized, terminally ill father and, sobbing with emotion, killed his father with a single shot to the head. He was convicted
of first-degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. The North Carolina Supreme Court upheld the conviction.

QUESTIONS: Is Forrest more deserving of severe punishment than Guthrie or Anderson? If not, does the court's decision to uphold his conviction indicate a flaw in its assessment of the evidence of premeditation or a flaw in the concept of pre-
meditation itself?

Consider Samuel H. Pillsbury, Judging Evil: Rethinking the Law of Murder and Manslaughter 104-105 (1998). Commenting on the California court's decision to reverse Anderson's first-degree murder conviction, Professor Pillsbury
observes:
As a matter of statutory interpretation, the Anderson decision is defensible. Premeditation does seem to involve coolness and calculation, and proof of those was weak at trial. [But] even if we assume the killing was un-
planned and impassioned, there were significant aggravating circumstances. . . . The butchering of a child for reasons of sexual frustration and rage . . . ranks high on any intuitive scale of wrongdoing, and may explain why
many appellate courts have been so reluctant to take premeditation seriously — it leads to decisions like Anderson. In particular, the
p.479
p. 480
case leads us to doubt whether an impassioned decision to kill is necessarily less culpable than a dispassionate one. [DJepending on motivation, an unplanned killing may present a more culpable offense than a reflective
killing by a brooding, self-doubting, self-reflective offender. Anderson suggests that what premeditation misses is the moral importance of the motive for the homicide.
(c) Following the lead of the Model Penal Code, some states have rejected premeditation as the basis for identifying murders that deserve the greatest punishment. See, e.g., the New York provisions, p. 467 supra. The rationale of this
approach is set out in Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.6 at 127-128 (1980):
[T]he case for a mitigated sentence on conviction of murder does not depend on a distinction between impulse and deliberation. Prior reflection may reveal the uncertainties of a tortured conscience rather than exceptional
depravity. The very fact of a long internal struggle may be evidence that the homicidal impulse was deeply aberrational and far more the product of extraordinary circumstances than a true reflection of the actor’s normal
character. [MJost mercy killings are the consequence of long and careful deliberation, but they are not especially appropriate cases for imposition of capital punishment. . . . It also seems clear, moreover, that some purely im-
pulsive murders will present no extenuating circumstances. The suddenness of the killing may simply reveal callousness so complete and depravity so extreme that no hesitation is required.
2. Mitigation to Manslaughter
a. The Concept of Provocation
Girouard v. State
Court of Appeals of Maryland
583 A.2d 718 (Md. 1991)
Cote, J. In this case we are asked to reconsider whether the types of provocation sufficient to mitigate the crime of murder to manslaughter should be limited to the categories we have heretofore recognized, or whether the sufficiency
of the provocation should be decided by the factfinder on a case-by-case basis. Specifically, we must determine whether words alone are provocation adequate to justify a conviction of manslaughter rather than one of second-degree murder.
The Petitioner, Steven S. Girouard, and the deceased, Joyce M. Girouard, had been married for about two months on October 28, 1987, the night of Joyce’s death. Both parties . . . were in the army. The . . . marriage was often tense and
strained, and there was some evidence that after marrying Steven, Joyce had resumed a relationship with her old boyfriend, Wayne.
On the night of Joyce's death [an angry argument developed, and Joyce taunted Steven] by saying, “I never did want to marry you and you are a lousy fuck

p. 460

461
and you remind me of my dad” [who had apparently abused her as a child]. The barrage of insults continued with her telling Steven that she wanted a divorce. . . . She also told him she had seen his commanding officer and filed charges against
him for abuse. She then asked Steven, “What are you going to do?” Receiving no response, she continued her verbal attack. She added that she had filed charges against him in the Judge Advocate General's Office (JAG) and that he would prob-
ably be court martialed. . . .

After pausing for a moment, Joyce [again] asked what Steven was going to do. What he did was lunge at her with the kitchen knife he had hidden behind the pillow and stab her 19 times. Realizing what he had done, he dropped the
knife and went to the bathroom to shower off Joyce's blood. Feeling like he wanted to die, Steven . . . slit his own wrists, . . . but when he realized that he would not die from his self-inflicted wounds, he . . . called the police, telling the dispatcher
that he had just murdered his wife.

When the police arrived they found Steven wandering around outside his apartment building. Steven was despondent and tearful and seemed detached, according to police officers who had been at the scene. He was unconcerned
about his own wounds, talking only about how much he loved his wife and how he could not believe what he had done. Joyce Girouard was pronounced dead at the scene.

[In a bench trial without a jury,] Steven Girouard was convicted . . . of second-degree murder and was sentenced to 22 years of incarceration, 10 of which were suspended. . . .

Petitioner relies primarily on out of state cases to provide support for his argument that the provocation to mitigate murder to manslaughter should not be limited only to the traditional circumstances of: extreme assault or battery upon
the defendant; mutual combat; defendant's illegal arrest; injury or serious abuse of a close relative of the defendant's; or the sudden discovery of a spouse's adultery. Petitioner argues that manslaughter is a catchall for homicides which are crimi-
nal but that lack the malice essential for a conviction of murder. [He] argues . . . that the categories of provocation adequate to mitigate should be broadened to include factual situations such as this one. The State counters by stating that [wlords
spoken by the victim, no matter how abusive or taunting, fall into a category society should not accept as adequate provocation. . . .

For provocation to be “adequate,” it must be “calculated to inflame the passion of a reasonable man and tend to cause him to act for the moment from passion rather than reason.” The issue we must resolve, then, is whether the
taunting words uttered by Joyce were enough to inflame the passion of a reasonable man so that that man would be sufficiently infuriated so as to strike out in hot-blooded blind passion to kill her. Although we agree with the trial judge that there
was needless provocation by Joyce, we also agree with him that the provocation was not adequate to mitigate second-degree murder to voluntary manslaughter.

[Wjords can constitute adequate provocation if they are accompanied by conduct indicating a present intention and ability to cause the defendant bodily harm. Clearly, no such conduct was exhibited by Joyce in this case. While Joyce
did step on Steven's back and pull his hair, he could not reasonably have feared bodily harm at her hands. . . . Joyce was about '1" tall and weighed 115 pounds, while he was 6'2" tall, weighing over 200 pounds. Joyce simply did not have the size
or strength to cause Steven to fear for his bodily safety. . ..

p.461
p.462

Other jurisdictions overwhelmingly agree with our cases and hold that words alone are not adequate provocation. Thus, . . . the provocation in this case was not enough to cause a reasonable man to stab his provoker 19 times.
Although a psychologist testified to Steven's mental problems and his need for acceptance and love, .. . “there must be not simply provocation in psychological fact, but one of certain fairly well-defined classes of provocation recognized as being
adequate as a matter of law.” The standard is one of reasonableness; it does not and should not focus on the peculiar frailties of mind of the Petitioner. That standard of reasonableness has not been met here. We cannot in good conscience coun-
tenance holding that a verbal domestic argument ending in the death of one spouse can result in a conviction of manslaughter. [SJocial necessity dictates our holding. Domestic arguments easily escalate into furious fights. We perceive no reason
for a holding in favor of those who find the easiest way to end a domestic dispute is by killing the offending spouse.

We will leave to another day the possibility of expansion of the categories of adequate provocation to mitigate murder to manslaughter. The facts of this case do not warrant the broadening of the categories recognized thus far.

[Affirmed]

Maher v. People

‘Supreme Court of Michigan
10 Mich. 212 (1862)

Curistiancy, J. The prisoner was charged with an assault with intent to kill and murder one Patrick Hunt. [The prosecution's evidence was that defendant entered a saloon in an agitated manner, approached Hunt, said something
unintelligible to him, and shot him, inflicting a non-fatal wound “in and through the left ear.” Maher offered evidence to show an adulterous intercourse between his wife and Hunt less than an hour before the assault. He had followed his wife and
Hunt as they entered the woods together, and when they left a half hour later, he followed Hunt to the saloon; just before he entered the saloon a friend told him that Hunt and his wife had had intercourse in the woods the day before. The trial court
ruled this evidence inadmissible and convicted Maher of assault with intent to murder.]

Was the evidence properly rejected? This is the main question in the case, and its decision must depend upon the question whether the proposed evidence would have tended to reduce the killing — had death ensued — from murder to
manslaughter. . . . If the homicide — in case death had ensued — would have been but manslaughter, then defendant could not be guilty of the assault with intent to murder, but only of a simple assault and battery. The question therefore involves
essentially the same principles as where evidence is offered for a similar purpose in a prosecution for murder. . . .

[Within the principle of all the recognized definitions [of malice aforethought], the homicide must, in all ordinary cases, have been committed with some degree of coolness and deliberation or, at least, under circumstances in which
ordinary men . . . would not be liable to have their reason clouded or obscured by

p.462
p. 469
passion; and the act must be prompted by, or the circumstances indicate that it sprung from, a wicked, depraved or malignant mind. . ..

But if the act of killing, though intentional, be committed under the influence of passion or in heat of blood, produced by an adequate or reasonable provocation, and before a reasonable time has elapsed for the blood to cool and
reason to resume its habitual control, and is the result of the temporary excitement, by which the control of reason was disturbed, rather than of any wickedness of heart or cruelty or recklessness of disposition: then the law, out of indulgence to
the frailty of human nature, or rather, in recognition of the laws upon which human nature is constituted, very properly regards the offense as of a less heinous character than murder, and gives it the designation of manslaughter.

To what extent the passions must be aroused and the dominion of reason disturbed to reduce the offense from murder to manslaughter, the cases are by no means agreed. . . .

The principle involved . .. would seem to suggest as the true general rule that reason should, at the time of the act, be disturbed or obscured by passion to an extent which might render ordinary men, of fair average disposition, liable to
act rashly or without due deliberation or reflection, and from passion, rather than judgment.

To the question, what shall be considered in law a reasonable or adequate provocation for such state of mind, so as to give to a homicide, committed under its influence, the character of manslaughter? On principle, the answer, as a
general rule, must be, anything the natural tendency of which would be to produce such a state of mind in ordinary men, and which the jury are satisfied did produce it in the case before them — not such a provocation as must, by the laws of the
human mind, produce such an effect with the certainty that physical effects follow from physical causes; for then the individual could hardly be held morally accountable. Nor, on the other hand, must the provocation, in every case, be held suffi-
cient or reasonable, because such a state of excitement has followed from it; for then, by habitual and long continued indulgence of evil passions, a bad man might acquire a claim to mitigation which would not be available to better men, and on
account of that very wickedness of heart which, in itself, constitutes an aggravation both in morals and in law.

In determining whether the provocation is sufficient or reasonable, ordinary human nature, or the average of men recognized as men of fair average mind and disposition, should be taken as the standard. .. .

Itis doubtless, in one sense, the province of the court to define what, in law, will constitute a reasonable or adequate provocation, but not, | think, in ordinary cases, to determine whether the provocation proved in the particular case is
sufficient or reasonable. This is essentially a question of fact, and to be decided with reference to the peculiar facts of each particular case. . . . [JJurors from the mode of their selection, coming from the various classes and occupations of society,
and conversant with the practical affairs of life, are, in my opinion, much better qualified to judge of the sufficiency and tendency of a given provocation and much more likely to fix, with some degree of accuracy, the standard of what constitutes
the average of ordinary human nature, than the judge whose habits and course of life give him much less experience of the workings of passion in the actual conflicts of life.

p. 469

464

The judge, it is true, must, to some extent, assume to decide upon the sufficiency of the alleged provocation, when the question arises upon the admission of testimony, and when it is so clear as to admit of no reasonable doubt upon
any theory, that the alleged provocation could not have had any tendency to produce such state of mind, in ordinary men, he may properly exclude the evidence; but, if the alleged provocation be such as to admit of any reasonable doubt, whether
it might not have had such tendency, it is much safer, | think, and more in accordance with principle, to let the evidence go to the jury under the proper instructions. . .. The law can not with justice assume by the light of past decision, to catalogue
all the various facts and combinations of facts which shall be held to constitute reasonable or adequate provocation. Scarcely two past cases can be found which are identical in all their circumstances; and there is no reason to hope for greater
uniformity in future. Provocations will be given without reference to any previous model, and the passions they excite will not consult the precedents.

The same principles which govern, as to the extent to which the passions must be excited and reason disturbed, apply with equal force . . . to the question of cooling time. This, like the provocation itself, must depend upon the nature of
man and the laws of the human mind, as well as upon the nature and circumstances of the provocation. . .. | am aware there are many cases in which it has been held a question of law, but | can see no principle on which such a rule can rest. The
court should, | think, define to the jury the principles upon which the question is to be decided, and leave them to determine whether the time was reasonable under all the circumstances of the particular case. . . .

It remains only to apply these principles to the present case. The proposed evidence, in connection with what had already been given, would have tended strongly to show the commission of adultery by Hunt with the prisoner's wife,
within half an hour before the assault; that the prisoner saw them going to the woods together, under circumstances calculated strongly to impress upon his mind the belief of the adulterous purpose; that he followed after them to the woods; that
Hunt and the prisoner's wife were, not long after, seen coming from the woods, and that the prisoner followed them, and went in hot pursuit after Hunt to the saloon, and was informed by a friend on the way that they had committed adultery the
day before in the woods. | can not resist the conviction that this would have been sufficient evidence of provocation to go to the jury, and from which, when taken in connection with the excitement and “great perspiration” exhibited on entering the
saloon, the hasty manner in which he approached and fired the pistol at Hunt, it would have been competent for the jury to find that the act was committed in consequence of the passion excited by the provocation, and in a state of mind which,
within the principle already explained, would have given to the homicide had death ensued, the character of manslaughter only. . . .

The judgment should be reversed and a new trial granted.

MANNING, J. I differ from my brethren in this case. | think the evidence was properly excluded. To make that manslaughter which would otherwise be murder, the provocation — | am not speaking of its sufficiency, but of the provocation
itself — must be given in the presence of the person committing the homicide. . .. Any other rule in an offense so grave as taking the life of a fellow-being, in the heat of passion, | fear would be more humane to the perpetrator than wise in its effects

464

485
on society. More especially since the abolition of the death penalty for murder, and the division of the crime into murder in the first and second degree there is not now the same reason, namely, the severity of the punishment, for relaxing the
rules of law in favor of a party committing homicide as before. It would, it seems to me, be extremely mischievous to let passion engendered by suspicion, or by something one has heard, enter into and determine the nature of a crime committed
while under its influence. The innocent as well as the guilty, or those who had not as well as those who had given provocation, might be the sufferers. If it be said that in such cases the giving of the provocation must be proved or it would go for
nothing; the answer is, that the law will not, and should not permit the lives of the innocent to be exposed with the guilty in this way, as it would do did it not require the cause of the provocation to occur in the presence of the person committing the
homicide.
NOTES

1. What is legally adequate provocation? The Girouard and Maher cases present contrasting approaches. The former, reflecting the predominant common-law position, maintains that only a few specific circumstances can serve as
legally adequate provocation. See, e.g., Riggs v. State, 138 So. 3d 1014, 1024 (Ala. Crim. App. 2013) (recognizing only three situations: “(1) when the accused witnesses his or her spouse in the act of adultery; (2) when the accused is assaulted or
faced with an imminent assault on himself; and (3) when the accused witnesses an assault on a family member or close relative”). And jurisdictions that follow this categorical approach rarely consider insulting words to be sufficient. See Annot., 2

A.L.R.3d 1292 (2021); Victoria Nourse, Passion's Progress: Modern Law Reform and the Provocation Defense, 106 Yale LJ. 1331 (1999). Thus, in State v. Carrero, 159 A.3d 1284, 1290-1291 (N.J. 2017), the court held that “words alone” cannot es-
tablish adequate provocation but that any battery can be considered adequate provocation “almost as a matter of law.”

The prevailing view that words cannot suffice has been softened in many jurisdictions to allow an exception when the words provoke, not simply because they are insulting, but because they disclose facts that could be sufficient if the
defendant had observed them directly — for example, when the words disclose an act of adultery. E.g., State v. Coyle, 574 A.2d 951 (N.J. 1990). The Maher approach, in contrast, holds that provoking circumstances need not conform to any pre-
established categories and that it is normally a question for the jury to decide whether the facts (including words alone) demonstrate sufficient provocation. Several American jurisdictions accept this minority view. E.g., Eason v. State, 950 N.W.2d
258, 265 (Minn. 2020); People v. Beltran, 301 P.3d 1120, 1127-1129 (Cal. 2013).

Under both the Girouard and Maher approaches, the focus is on whether the provoking circumstances produced anger sufficient to cause the defendant's loss of self-control. See Michal Buchhandler-Raphael, Loss of Self-Control,
Dual-Process Theories, and Provocation, 88 Fordham L. Rev. 1815 (2020); Michal Buchhandler-Raphael, Fear-Based Provocation, 67 Am. U. L. Rev. 1719 (2018). Shouldn't other emotions — like fear, panic, or desperation — also be eligible to mit-
igate the punishment associated with a loss of self-control? Or are those emotions less relevant when the loss of self-control leads the defendant to kill another person?

p. 485
p. 486

What about “mercy killing” as a reason to mitigate murder to manslaughter? See Michal Buchhandler-Raphael, Compassionate Homicide, 98 Wash. U. L. Rev. 189 (2020). Reconsider the Forrest case, p. 479, Note 4(b), supra, where the
defendant, sobbing with emotion, killed his terminally ill father to end the father’s suffering. Under existing law this was a clear case of premeditated first-degree murder. And the father’s suffering certainly did not qualify as potentially adequate
provocation under the Girouard approach. Should it qualify under the more flexible Maher approach? Recall that the Maher court cautioned, “[WJhen it is so clear as to admit of no reasonable doubt upon any theory, that the alleged provocation
could not have had any tendency to produce such state of mind [temporary excitement, by which the control of reason was disturbed], in ordinary [people], [the judge] may properly exclude the evidence.” If mercy killing cannot qualify for mitiga-
tion even under the Maher approach, should the doctrine be expanded to include it? Or would that much flexibility leave excessive scope for bias in jury decision making?

2. Rationale of the provocation defense. A variety of rationales for the mitigating effect of provocation have been offered. They are critically examined in Roni Rosenberg, Human Dignity and the Doctrine of Provocation: A New
Approach, 34 Notre Dame J.L. Ethics & Pub. Pol'y 281 (2020), and Mitchell N. Berman & lan P. Farrell, Provocation Manslaughter as Partial Justification and Partial Excuse, 52 Wm. & Mary L. Rev. 1027 (2011). The two most common rationales are
grounded in the notion of either partial justification or partial excuse. A classic justification is self-defense when an actor kills as a necessary protective measure against an unlawful and imminent threat of great bodily harm. In contrast, a killing is
obviously not justified merely because the killer was insane; insanity is a classic example of an excuse. We explore the differences between justifications and excuses in greater detail in Chapter 8. Professor Vera Bergelson explains the fundamen-
tal distinction (Justification or Excuse? Exploring the Meaning of Provocation, 42 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 307, 307 (2009)):

Justifications focus on the wrongfulness of an act; excuses focus on the culpability of the actor. [W]hen we say that a perpetrator is excused, we wholly condemn what he did and forgive him merely because of his reduced

volitional or cognitive capacity. When we say that the perpetrator is justified, even in part, we treat him as a fully responsible agent and acknowledge that what he did was right or at least not entirely wrong. . ..

Which of these concepts best explains the law's willingness to mitigate punishment in the classic instances of provocation cited in Girouard (“serious abuse of a close relative . . . or the sudden discovery of a spouse's adultery”)? Are
defendants in those situations partially justified in responding with lethal force? Or are their actions entirely wrong but partially excusable because they lacked their usual ability to exercise self-control? Consider these efforts to explain the basis of
the provocation defense:

(a) Provocation as partial excuse. In People v. Clapps, 2020 WL 7766375, at *3, *S (Cal. Ct. App. 2020), the judge at the defendant's bench trial had rejected a provocation defense on the ground that “none of [the victim's] actions
were sufficient . . . to cause a person of average disposition to . . . produc[e] a knife . .. , and then stab them six times.” The appellate court reversed, holding that this standard

p. 486
467

was improper because the relevant question was not whether an ordinary person would be moved to kill but only “whether an average person would react, without reflection.” In People v. Beltran, 301 P.3d 1120, 30 (Cal. 2013), the California
Supreme Court explained:

[Slociety expects the average person not to kill, even when provoked. . . . Such a killing is not justified but understandable in light of “the frailty of human nature.” (Maher, supra) . . . Adopting a standard requiring such

provocation that the ordinary person of average disposition would be moved to kill focuses on the wrong thing. The proper focus is placed on the defendant's state of mind, not on his particular act. To be adequate, the

provocation must be one that would cause an emotion so intense that an ordinary person would simply react, without reflection.

Professor Samuel H. Pillsbury clarifies this crucial point (Misunderstanding Provocation, 43 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 143, 145-146 (2009)):

[The adequately provoked defendant] has committed a serious crime. No matter how we define the reasonable person, the adjective describes a law-abiding individual. We do not expect a law-abiding person to commit a

felony, let alone a serious crime of homicidal violence. [A] finding of provocation does not represent a judgment that the defendant's conduct was in any sense morally acceptable.

See also Jerome Michael & Herbert Wechsler, A Rationale of the Law of Homicide, 37 Colum. L. Rev. 1261, 1281-1282 (1937):

Provocation . . . must be estimated by the probability that [the provocative] circumstances would affect most [people] in like fashion. . . . Other things being equal, the greater the provocation, measured in that way, the more

ground there is for attributing the intensity of the actor’s passions . . . to the extraordinary character of the situation in which he was placed rather than to any extraordinary deficiency in his own character. [It is] beside the

point, that most [people] do not kill on even the gravest provocation; the point is that the more strongly they would be moved to kill by circumstances of the sort which provoked the actor . . ., and the more difficulty they

would experience in resisting the impulse to which he yielded, the less does his succumbing serve to differentiate his character from theirs. But the slighter the provocation, the more basis there is for ascribing the actor's

act... to an unusual deficiency in those other desires which counteract in most [people] the desires which impel them to homicidal acts. .. .

(b) Provocation as partial justification. Others argue that the provocation defense rests in part on notions of justification. Consider A.J. Ashworth, The Doctrine of Provocation, 35 Cambridge L.J. 292, 307-308 (1976):

The term partial justification [is closely related to] the moral notion that the punishment of wrongdoers is justifiable. This is not to argue that it is ever morally right to kill a person who does wrong. Rather, the claim implicit in

partial justification is that an individual is to some extent

467
p. 468

morally justified in making a punitive return against someone who intentionally causes him serious offence, and that this serves to differentiate someone who is provoked to lose his self-control and kill from the unprovoked

killer. [T]he paradigm of provocation generally involves moral wrongs by both parties. [T]he complicity of the victim cannot and should not be ignored, for the blameworthiness of his conduct has a strong bearing on . . . the

reasonableness of the accused’s failure to control himself.

(c) Both or neither? Does it matter which explanation for the defense we choose? Some argue that the underlying rationale of the provocation defense does not have practical consequences. See, e.g., Gabriel J. Chin, Unjustified: The
Practical irrelevance of the Justification/Excuse Distinction, 43 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 79 (2009). Professor Bergelson notes (supra at 309) that “[als a product of historical tradition, political compromise, and changing cultural norms, the law often
combines elements of more than one rationale.” But she also cautions (id. at 308) that “[k]nowing whether . . . the defendant was right or wrong in what he did and whether society can fairly expect others in his situation to behave differently is
essential for society's collective sense of justice and for people's ability to make personal decisions.” If so, then should we treat the defendant who kills in response to serious abuse of a close relative as partially justified or partially excused? Test
your answers by applying them to a few simple variations on this classic scenario:

(1) Suppose the defendant kills Alex two days after learning that Alex had seriously abused the defendant's child. Alex’s wrong does not diminish with the passage of time; yet the traditional common-law approach always denies a
provocation defense in this situation.’ If provocation is a partial justification, why should it become unavailable after “cooling time” has elapsed?

(2) Conversely, suppose that immediately after learning of Alex's serious abuse, the defendant shoots at Alex but misses; the bullets ricochet and kill an innocent bystander. The defendant's loss of self-control and the reasons for it
are the same regardless of the identity of the person hit by the shots; yet common-law courts often deny a provocation defense in this situation.¢ If the defense is based on an excusable loss of self-control, shouldn't it re-
main available regardless of whether the person killed was the actual provoker or someone innocent of wrongdoing?

(3) In State v. Pittman, 647 S.E.2d 144 (S.C. 2007), a 12-year-old boy was living with his grandfather Joe Frank, when Frank, as a punishment, hit him across the back and buttocks five or six times with a paddle. Sent to his room, the
boy grabbed a shotgun, waited ten minutes in his room, and then shot and killed his grandfather. Tried as an adult, the boy was convicted of murder, after the trial judge refused to instruct the jury on the provocation de-
fense. The state supreme court affirmed. Although noting that “an overt threatening act or a physical encounter may constitute sufficient legal provocation,” the court held that rule inapplicable because

p. 468
p. 469
“Appellant's guardian . . . was legally entitled to paddle him,” and therefore “we decline to hold that a child has sufficient legal provocation to use deadly force against a guardian who disciplines through corporal punishment.” Id. at
168. Is the decision sound? On what principle?
3. Should the provocation defense be abolished? (a)The policy arguments:
STEPHEN J. MORSE, UNDIMINISHED CONFUSION IN DIMINISHED CAPACITY, 75 J. CRIM. L. & CRIMINOLOGY 1, 33-34(1984): Reasonable people do not kill no matter how much they are provoked, and even enraged people generally retain the
capacity to control homicidal . . . desires. We cheapen both life and our conception of responsibility by maintaining the provocation/passion mitigation. [Eliminating it] may seem harsh and contrary to the supposedly humanitarian reforms of the
evolving criminal law. But [provocation/passion mitigation] is humanitarian only if one focuses sympathetically on perpetrators and not on their victims, and views the former as mostly helpless objects of their overwhelming emotions and irrational-
ity. This sympathy is misplaced, however, and is disrespectful to the perpetrator. As virtually every human being knows because we all have been enraged, it is easy not to kill, even when one is enraged.
EMILY L. MILLER (COMMENT), (WO)MANSLAUGHTER: VOLUNTARY MANSLAUGHTER, GENDER, AND THE MODEL PENAL CODE, 50 EMORY L.J. 665, 692 (2000): [JJuries cannot be expected to enforce a standard of reasonableness which ade-
quately protects a woman's life. Social science indicates that both aggressors and juries view the world through lenses of cultural construction: masculine violence is simply an inevitable fact of life. . . . Instead of reinforcing cultural values that
condone masculine violence, the law must take a normative stand. [Blecause what is reasonable cannot be determined without reference to value systems biased in favor of men, the only truly egalitarian approach is abolition. The value of human
life must trump the law's sympathy for the defendant's response. By virtue of its brutal discrimination against women under both common law and MPC, the defense of voluntary manslaughter no longer has a place in American penal law.
AYA GRUBER, A PROVOCATIVE DEFENSE, 103 CALIF. L. REV. 273, 277, 294, 310, 312, 316-319, 332 (2015): [Flew question the now common [feminist] assertion that broad formulations of the [provocation] defense . . . are “anti-woman.”2.. .
Provocation critics contend that the doctrine (especially in its broad form) prevents the state from appropriately enforcing criminal law against sexist killers who deserve punishment for murder. [But provocation] claims for mitigation are very rarely
successful. Moreover, . . . “the group most likely to be burdened by the elimination or limitation of the provocation defense is young men of color accused of non-intimate homicides and facing murder charges in one of the most punitive systems
on earth."295...
p. 469
p. 490
The law, critics contend, should not condone the reasoning of aggressive men and allow their defense attorneys to put women victims on trial. . . . However, tethering women’s equality interests to crime victims’ (perceived) interests in
harsh retribution turns each instance of leniency toward a male defendant into a case of discrimination against women [and] exacerbates inequality because there are not enough women defendants to similarly benefit from the law's leniency. [But
unlike male killers, who largely kill in nonintimate settings, female killers generally slay intimates (lovers, family members, and children). Thus, a legal change directed toward reducing leniency in intimate homicides increases severity in the one

realm where women are most likely to be murder defendants, leaving untouched the nondomestic homicides perpetrated nearly exclusively by men. [lt is an exercise in futility to make a generalist discrimination case against provocation... . The
defense does not necessarily burden women unfairly nor does it particularly privilege sexist men.

LAW COMMISSION (U.K.), REPORT NO. 290, PARTIAL DEFENCES TO MURDER 38-39 (2004): Powerful arguments can be advanced for and against the abolition of provocation as a defense. . . . One school of thought holds that anger cannot ethi-
cally afford any ground for mitigating the gravity of deliberately violent action . .. which threatens life. .. . Nevertheless, a killing in anger produced by serious wrongdoing is ethically less wicked, and therefore deserving of a lesser punishment, than
say, a Killing out of greed, lust, jealousy or for political reasons. . . . There is a distinction in moral blameworthiness between overreaction to grave provocation and unprovoked use of violence. . . .

We favour as the moral basis for retaining a defense of provocation that the defendant had legitimate ground to feel seriously wronged by the person at whom his or her conduct was aimed, and this lessens the moral culpability of the
defendant reacting to that outrage in the way that he or she did. It is the justification of the sense of outrage which provides a partial excuse for their responsible conduct.

(b) Recent reforms. In a move that is rare among common-law jurisdictions, three Australian states abolished the provocation defense; defendants who kill in response to reasonable provocation are therefore subject to conviction for
murder. See Carolyn B. Ramsey, Provoking Change: Comparative Insights on Feminist Homicide Law Reform, 100 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 33 (2010).

QUESTIONS: If a jurisdiction abolishes the provocation defense, what punishment should be imposed on defendants convicted of murder? Should provoked defendants face the same punishment as defendants who kill in cold blood, or should
judges be authorized to extend some form of leniency when the killing is the result of “reasonable” provocation? If the latter, has the provocation defense been abolished or merely moved to a different place in the criminal process? If provocation
should be taken into account in some fashion, how is this best accomplished?

Consider People v. Nesler, 941 P.2d 87 (Cal. 1997). The defendant confronted a man who had sexually abused her son, and in a burst of anger, she shot and killed

p. 490
p49
him. She was convicted of manslaughter. Should murder be the only appropriate charge for a defendant like Nesler? If so, how should her sentence be determined and by whom?

4, Sexual infidelity as provocation. (a) Why has the law traditionally regarded sexual infidelity as adequate provocation? What does it share with the other categories that the common law allowed — for example, serious physical
assault, mutual combat, and illegal arrest? For discussion of the cultural presuppositions of voluntary manslaughter doctrine, see Donna K. Coker, Heat of Passion and Wife Killing: Men Who Batter/Men Who Kill, 2 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Women’s Stud.
71 (1992). Note that women seldom kill their unfaithful partners. Does this fact have a bearing on the reasonableness of a husband's loss of self-control in response to unfaithfulness by his spouse?

Although the Girouard court mentions “sudden discovery of a spouse's adultery” as an allowable form of provocation in Maryland, this rule prompted a public outcry in 1994 when Keith Peacock killed his unfaithful wife, was convicted
of manslaughter, and was sentenced only to an 18-month term in a work-release program. In response, Maryland amended its law to provide that “discovery of one’s spouse engaged in sexual intercourse with another person does not constitute
legally adequate provocation for the purpose of mitigating a killing from the crime of murder to voluntary manslaughter.” The British Parliament enacted a similar provision in 2009.2 But few other common-law jurisdictions have taken this step.
QUESTIONS: Should the sudden, unexpected discovery of a spouse's adultery provide the basis for a provocation defense? If not, is that because adultery is (usually) not illegal? Or is it because sexual infidelity does not constitute a significant
wrong to the deceived spouse? See Roni Rosenberg, A New Rationale for the Doctrine of Provocation: Applications to Cases of Killing an Unfaithful Spouse, 37 Colum. J. Gender & L. 220 (2019). Professor Susan D. Rozelle argues (Controlling Pas-
sion: Adultery and the Provocation Defense, 37 Rutgers L.J. 197, 200 (2005)) that the provocation defense should be restricted to “defendants who were legally entitled to use some amount of force when they killed,” and accordingly that sudden
discovery of a spouse's adultery should never suffice. But under this approach, an enraged husband who Kills his wife's rapist (in circumstances not sufficient to establish a privilege to use defensive force) would be guilty of murder. Is that an ac-
ceptable result?

How should the issue be analyzed if provocation is viewed not as a partial justification but rather as a partial excuse? Is mitigation inappropriate because emotionally healthy individuals do not become exceptionally upset, do not lose
their normal capacity for self-control, upon unexpectedly discovering a spouse's infidelity? Or is mitigation inappropriate because society must condemn and forcefully deter the deceived spouse's response, even if the loss of self-control is under-
standable? To what extent should the policy decision be shaped by the fact that defendants who invoke this defense are overwhelmingly male, and that the victims of such killings are overwhelmingly female? For probing discussion, see Samuel H.

p49
p.492
Pillsbury, Judging Evil: Rethinking the Law of Murder and Manslaughter (1998); Coker, supra.

(b) Courts that permit sexual infidelity to qualify for a heat-of-passion defense often interpret the boundaries of this category narrowly. In State v. Simonovich, 688 S.E.2d 67, 72 (N.C. Ct. App. 2010), the defendant killed his wife in a rage
after she admitted to past acts of adultery and taunted him, stating that she intended to continue having sex with other men. The court held that the defendant was not entitled to voluntary manslaughter instructions, because he had not discovered
his wife “in the very act of intercourse.” In Dennis v. State, 661 A.2d 175 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 1995), the defendant, after observing his wife, her dress raised, in a sexual embrace with another man, burst into the room and fatally shot the other man.
The court held it proper to instruct the jury that the circumstances could qualify as legally adequate provocation only if the defendant had seen sexual intercourse, not other sorts of sexual contact.

State v. Turner, 708 So. 2d 232 (Ala. Crim. App. 1997), was an unusual case in which an enraged woman shot and killed a sexually unfaithful man. The court held that voluntary manslaughter instructions were not required because the
defendant and victim, who had lived together for many years, were not legally married. In Illinois, that issue is still open (People v. Thompkins, 2020 Il. App. 160345-U (Ill. App. Ct. 2020)), in part because it is unclear whether changing sexual mores
and the changing scope of the right to marry support or undercut the case for requiring a formal marriage. Which is it? Does the absence of a formal marriage affect the emotional significance of sexual infidelity when the parties have lived together
ina long-standing relationship? Does the relevance of formal marriage depend on whether provocation is a partial justification or a partial excuse?

5, Same-sex advances as provocative acts. Trial judges sometimes allow defendants to raise a provocation defense when they have killed in response to an unwelcome but nonviolent sexual advance from someone of the same sex.
Several appellate courts, however, have ruled provocation claims of this sort insufficient as a matter of law. E.g., Patrick v. State, 104 So. 3d 1046 (Fla. 2012). Recent scholarship has also considered “trans panic” provocation defenses in situation
where people, during sexual intimacy, discover that their partner is transgender. See Cynthia Lee & Peter Kwan, The Trans Panic Defense: Masculinity, Heteronormativity, and the Murder of Transgender Women, 66 Hastings L.J. 77 (2014). New
York eliminated the provocation defense in this context. See N.Y. Penal Law §125.25(1)(a)(i), p. 467 supra.

QUESTIONS: Why should a proposal to engage in consensual sexual activity, regardless of the gender of the person making the proposal, ever be sufficient provocation to reduce an intentional killing from murder to manslaughter? Joshua
Dressler argues that there can sometimes be valid, nonhomophobic reasons to permit a provocation defense when an engaged person kills in response to sexually suggestive touching, because “ordinary, fallible human beings might become so
upset that their out of control reaction deserves mitigated punishment.” Dressler, When “Heterosexual” Men Kill “Homosexual” Men: Reflections on Provocation Law, Sexual Advances, and the “Reasonable Man” Standard, 85 J. Crim. L. & Crim-
inology 726 (1995). Can a defendant's anger or indignation in such cases be disentangled from feelings of homophobia? Compare Robert B. Mison, Comment, Homophobia in Manslaughter: The Homosexual Advance as Insufficient Provocation,
80 Cal. L.

p.492

499
Rev. 133 (1992) (opposing Dressler’s view and emphasizing that such a defense is likely to exploit bias against gender-nonconforming people and to imply that their lives are less worthy of protection).

Professor Cynthia Lee once suggested a third approach. In The Gay Panic Defense, 42 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 471, 471 (2008), she proposed that, instead of banning “gay panic” arguments, prosecutors should permit them to be aired and
then respond to them directly, in order to counteract explicit or implicit juror biases. But in The Trans Panic Defense Revisited, 57 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 1411, 1445-1446 (2020), Professor Lee concludes that “education is... not sufficient to change at-
titudes and behavior.” Accordingly she proposes legislation (id. at 1487) to stipulate that

[an] alleged provocation or heat of passion shall be deemed not objectively reasonable and not legally adequate if based upon the discovery of, knowledge about, or potential disclosure of the actual or perceived sexual

orientation or gender identity or expression of the victim.

In accord with Professor Lee's view, at least ten states have recently banned provocation defenses based on “gay panic” and “trans panic.” Id. at 1468-1481. Is this an effective solution to the problem? If juror biases will be in play, is it
also necessary to confront them directly in the courtroom? More fundamentally, should the law seek to distinguish between inexcusable, premeditated hate crimes and the situation that concerns Professor Dressler — the spontaneous loss of self-
control triggered by defendants’ anxiety about their own sexual identity? If that is a genuine distinction (is it?), are the realities of the trial process capable of drawing it in an unbiased manner?

6. Cooling time. The common-law view is that a significant lapse of time between the provocation and the act of killing makes the provocation inadequate. Some courts permit the jury to make the judgment whether sufficient cooling
time has elapsed. Thus, in People v. Berry, 556 P.2d 777 (Cal. 1976), the provoked defendant waited for his victim in her apartment for 20 hours before killing her. The court held that the defendant was nevertheless entitled to a manslaughter in-
struction, because the jury could find that the defendant's heat of passion resulted from a long-smoldering prior course of provocative conduct by the victim, the passage of time serving to aggravate rather than cool defendant's agitation.

This flexible approach and its trust in the jury are, however, the exception. More commonly, courts hold that the passage of significant time makes provocation inadequate ‘as a matter of law” and therefore defeats the right to an
instruction on voluntary manslaughter. Even short intervals of time are often considered preclusive. A Nebraska decision found 20 minutes to be adequate cooling time as a matter of law. See State v. Gonzales, 884 N.W.2d 102, 122 (Neb. 2016). In
Venable v. Johnson, 2016 WL 6662686 (D.N.J. 2016), the court held that just ten minutes was sufficient to preclude the defense. Venable had argued with Phelps at a club, a bouncer had kicked him out, and he then waited outside. When Phelps
exited ten minutes later, Venable shot and killed him. The court held that in the context of having been escorted out of the club, the passage of ten minutes was “ample time for cooling off.” Id. at "12.

The cooling-time limitation can sometimes be surmounted by arguing that an event just before the homicide rekindled earlier provocation. But many courts

p.499
Tee 88
refuse to take note of “rekindling” or assume that earlier events lose their provocative force when a defendant has had “time to process this information.” Meiners v. State, 540 S.W.3d 832, 837 (Mo. 2018). Consider State v. Gounagias, 153 P. 9
(Wash. 1915). The deceased had committed an act of forcible sodomy upon the defendant and then bragged to others about it. Those who heard of the episode repeatedly ridiculed the defendant, and after two weeks he finally lost control and
killed the man who had assaulted him. The defendant argued that the cumulative effect of the taunts, reminding him of the previous provocation, led to a sudden heat of passion. But the court held that because the legally sufficient provoking event
had occurred two weeks before the killing, the interval constituted adequate cooling time as a matter of law.

NOTE ON NONPROVOKING VICTIMS AND PROVOKING DEFENDANTS

1. Victims other than the provoker. Sometimes the defendant kills someone other than the provoker. How should the following cases be handled?

(a) Derivative provocation. Three friends, Morgan, Ryan, and Logan, are having a drink at the local bar when suddenly the conversation becomes acrimonious. On Morgan’s signal, Morgan's little dog, Spot, starts biting Ryan, and
while Ryan screams in anger, Morgan cruelly tells Ryan the lie that Spot has never had a rabies inoculation. Logan thinks it’s all very funny and laughs uproariously. Ryan becomes enraged and shoots both Morgan and Logan dead. Assuming that
a voluntary manslaughter instruction is warranted in Ryan's prosecution for killing Morgan (query: Is it2), is such an instruction also warranted in Ryan's prosecution for killing Logan?

(b) Misdirected reaction. In State v. Mauricio, 568 A.2d 879 (N.J. 1990), a bouncer forcefully ejected the defendant from a bar. He slammed defendant against a wall and then kicked and pushed him down the stairs, making him hit
his head sharply on the floor. Expecting the bar to close shortly (it was 2:30 a.m), defendant waited outside for the bouncer to emerge. About five minutes later, a patron not involved in the fight left the bar. Defendant mistook the patron for the
bouncer, followed him, and shot him dead. The New Jersey Supreme Court reversed a murder conviction, holding that the trial judge had erred in refusing to give voluntary manslaughter instructions. Several states would reach the same result by
statute. See, e.g., Pa. Cons. Stat. §2503(a)(2), p. 466 supra. Are these results sound if the provocation defense is designed to afford mitigation for partially justified killings? Or do these results suggest that provocation must be viewed as a partial
excuse? Compare Tex. Penal Code §19.02, requiring the provocation be given “by the individual killed or another acting with the person killed.”

(c) Intentionally killing a non-provoking victim. Suppose that the person killed is not associated with the provoker and is not the accidental victim of anger directed against the provoker. Should justifiably enraged defendants be
able to claim mitigation to manslaughter when they are aware that the person killed was an innocent bystander? In Rex v. Scriva, [1951] Vict. L.R. 298, a father observed an automobile driver knock down and severely injure his daughter. When the
father,

p. 494

p. 495
brandishing a knife, went after the driver, a bystander attempted to restrain him, and the father then fatally stabbed the bystander. In People v. Spurlin, 202 Cal. Rptr. 663 (Ct. App. 1984), the defendant killed his spouse after an intense argument
over their respective sexual escapades, and still in a rage, killed his sleeping nine-year-old son. In both Scriva and Spurlin, the courts held that a provocation defense was unavailable on the charges of murdering the non-provoking victims.° In
accord, People v. Verdugo, 236 P.3d 1035, 1061 (Cal. 2010), holds that “{t]he provocation which incites the defendant to homicidal conduct in the heat of passion must be caused by the victim, or be conduct reasonably believed by the defendant
to have been engaged in by the victim.”

Are these holdings sound? If a defendant claiming provocation must show that the killing was partially justified by the victim's wrongful conduct, then Scriva and Spurlin are obviously correct. But courts often permit a provocation
defense when the defendant's loss of control is merely excusable. From that perspective, are the decisions in Scriva and Spurlin still correct on the ground that a loss of self-control is understandable only when it prompts violence directed against
the actual or perceived provoker? Compare R.S. O'Regan, Indirect Provocation and Misdirected Retaliation, [1968] Crim. L. Rev. 319, 323: “Once an accused loses his self-control it is unreal to insist that his retaliatory acts be directed only against
his provoker. When his reason has been dethroned a man cannot be expected ... . ‘to guide his anger with judgment.’ ” For analysis that probes the psychological dynamics of provocation, see Rebecca Hollander-Blumoff, Crime, Punishment, and
the Psychology of Self-Control, 61 Emory L.J. 501 (2012); Reid Griffith Fontaine, Adequate (Non)Provocation and Heat of Passion as Excuse Not Justification, 43 U. Mich. J.L. Reform 27 (2009).

2. Defendants who elicit provocation. In Regina v. Johnson, [1989] 2 All E.R. 839, defendant had threatened and insulted Roberts; Roberts responded by pouring beer over the defendant's head, pinning him to a wall, and then
punching him. Defendant drew a knife and fatally stabbed Roberts. The trial judge refused to instruct the jury on provocation, ruling that it was “difficult to see how a man who excites provocative conduct can in turn rely on it as provocation in the
criminal law.” The appellate court reversed, stating, “[Wle find it impossible to accept that the mere fact that a defendant caused a reaction in others, which in tum led him to lose his self-control, should result in the issue of provocation being kept
outside a jury's consideration.” Some American statutes preclude the defense in these circumstances.7 E.g., Or. Rev. Stat. §163.135(1) (2016). Which is the better response to this issue?

p. 495
p. 496
b. The Model Penal Code Approach
People v. Casassa
New York Court of Appeals
404 N.E.2d 1310 (N.Y. 1980)

Jasen, J. ... On February 28, 1977, Victoria Lo Consolo was brutally murdered. Defendant Victor Casassa and Miss Lo Consolo . . . met in August, 1976, as a result of their residence in the same apartment complex. . . . The two appar-
ently dated casually . . . until November, 1976, when Miss Lo Consolo informed defendant that she was not “falling in love” with him. Defendant claims that Miss Lo Consolo's candid statement of her feelings “devastated him.”

Miss Lo Consolo's rejection of defendant's advances also precipitated a bizarre series of actions on the part of defendant which, he asserts, demonstrate the existence of extreme emotional disturbance upon which he predicates his
affirmative defense. Defendant, aware that Miss Lo Consolo maintained social relationships with others, broke into the apartment below Miss Lo Consolo’s on several occasions to eavesdrop. These eavesdropping sessions allegedly caused him
to be under great emotional stress. Thereafter, on one occasion, he broke into Miss Lo Consolo’s apartment while she was out . . . , disrobed and lay for a time in Miss Lo Consolo’s bed. During this break-in, defendant was armed with a knife
which, he later told police, he carried “because he knew that he was either going to hurt Victoria or Victoria was going to cause him to commit suicide.”

Defendant's final visit to his victim's apartment occurred on February 28, 1977. Defendant brought several bottles of wine and liquor with him to offer as a gift. Upon Miss Lo Consolo’s rejection of this offering, defendant produced a
steak knife which he had brought with him, stabbed Miss Lo Consolo several times in the throat, dragged her body to the bathroom and submerged it in a bathtub full of water to “make sure she was dead.” .. .

Defendant [was charged with second-degree murder. He] waived a jury and proceeded to trial before the County Court. . .. The defendant did not contest the underlying facts of the crime. Instead, the sole issue presented to the trial
court was whether the defendant, at the time of the killing, had acted under the influence of “extreme emotional disturbance.” The defense presented only one witness, a psychiatrist, who testified, in essence, that the defendant had become
obsessed with Miss Lo Consolo and that the course which their relationship had taken, combined with several personality attributes peculiar to defendant, caused him to be under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance at the time of the
killing.

In rebuttal, the People produced . . . a psychiatrist who testified that although the defendant was emotionally disturbed, he was not under the influence of “extreme emotional disturbance” within the meaning . . . of the Penal Law, be-
cause his disturbed state was not the product of external factors but rather was “a stress he created from within himself, dealing mostly with a fantasy, a refusal to accept the reality of the situation.”

p. 496
p.497

The trial court . . . considered the appropriate test to be whether in the totality of the circumstances the finder of fact could understand how a person might have his reason overcome. Concluding that the test was not to be applied
solely from the viewpoint of defendant, the court found that defendant's emotional reaction at the time of the commission of the crime was so peculiar to him that it could not be considered reasonable so as to reduce the conviction to manslaugh-
ter in the first degree. Accordingly, the trial court found defendant guilty of the crime of murder in the second degree. . . . On this appeal defendant contends that the trial court erred in failing to afford him the benefit of the affirmative defense of
“extreme emotional disturbance.” . . .

Section 125.25(1)(a) of the Penal Law provides that it is an affirmative defense to the crime of murder in the second degree where “[t]he defendant acted under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance for which there was a
reasonable explanation or excuse.” . . . In enacting [this provision], the Legislature adopted the language of the manslaughter provisions of the Model Penal Code. The only substantial distinction between the New York statute and the Model Penal
Code is the designation by the Legislature of “extreme emotional disturbance” as an “affirmative defense,” thus placing the burden of proof on this issue upon defendant. . . .

The “extreme emotional disturbance” defense is an outgrowth of the “heat of passion” doctrine [but] the new formulation is significantly broader in scope than the “heat of passion” doctrine which it replaced.

For example, the “heat of passion” doctrine required that a defendant's action be undertaken as a response to some provocation which prevented him from reflecting upon his actions. Moreover, such reaction had to be immediate.
The existence of a “cooling off” period completely negated any mitigating effect which the provocation might otherwise have had. In Patterson [39 N.Y.2d 288], however, this court recognized that “[aln action influenced by an extreme emotional
disturbance is not one that is necessarily so spontaneously undertaken. Rather, it may be that a significant mental trauma has affected a defendant's mind for a substantial period of time, simmering in the unknowing subconscious and then inex-
plicably coming to the fore.” This distinction between the past and present law of mitigation, enunciated in Patterson, was expressly adopted by the trial court and properly applied in this case.

The thrust of defendant's claim, however, concems a question arising out of another perceived distinction between “heat of passion” and “extreme emotional disturbance” . . . , to wit: whether, assuming that the defense is applicable to
a broader range of circumstances, the standard by which the reasonableness of defendant's emotional reaction is to be tested must be an entirely subjective one. Defendant [claims] that the reasonableness of his “explanation or excuse” should
be determined solely with reference to his own subjective viewpoint. [This argument] is misplaced. . . .

[We have] noted that “[the] purpose of the extreme emotional disturbance defense is to permit the defendant to show that his actions were caused by a mental infirmity not arising to the level of insanity, and that he is less culpable for
having committed them.” We also noted that “[the] differences between the present New York statute and its predecessor . . . can be explained by the tremendous

p.497

p. 498
advances made in psychology since 1881 and a willingness on the part of the courts, legislators, and the public to reduce the level of responsibility imposed on those whose capacity has been diminished by mental trauma.” . . . While it is true
that . . . “extreme emotional disturbance” . . . is a lesser form of mental infirmity than insanity, [we have not held] that all mental infirmities not arising to the level of insanity constitute “extreme emotional disturbance”. . .

[T]he Comments to the Model Penal Code, from which the New York statute was drawn, are instructive. The defense of “extreme emotional disturbance” has two principal components — (1) the particular defendant must have “acted
under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance,” and (2) there must have been “a reasonable explanation or excuse” for such extreme emotional disturbance, “the reasonableness of which is to be determined from the viewpoint of a person

in the defendant's situation under the circumstances as the defendant believed them to be.” The first requirement is wholly subjective — i.e., it involves a determination that the particular defendant did in fact act under extreme emotional distur-
bance, that the claimed explanation as to the cause of his action is not contrived or sham.

The second component is more difficult to describe — i.e., whether there was a reasonable explanation or excuse for the emotional disturbance. It was designed to sweep away “the rigid rules that have developed with respect to the
sufficiency of particular types of provocation, such as the rule that words alone can never be enough. .. . The ultimate test, however, is objective; there must be ‘reasonable’ explanation or excuse for the actor's disturbance.” In light of these com-
ments and the necessity of articulating the defense in terms comprehensible to jurors, we conclude that the determination whether there was reasonable explanation or excuse for a particular emotional disturbance should be made by viewing the
subjective, internal situation in which the defendant found himself and the external circumstances as he perceived them at the time, however inaccurate that perception may have been, and assessing from that standpoint whether the explanation
or excuse for his emotional disturbance was reasonable, so as to entitle him to a reduction of the crime charged from murder in the second degree to manslaughter in the first degree.2 We recognize that even such a description of the defense
provides no precise guidelines and necessarily leaves room for the exercise of judgmental evaluation by the jury. This, however, appears to have been the intent of the draftsmen. “The purpose was explicitly to give full scope to what amounts to a
plea in mitigation based upon a mental or emotional trauma of significant dimensions, with the jury asked to show whatever empathy it can.” (Wechsler, Codification of Criminal Law in the United States: The Model Penal Code, 68 Col. L. Rev. 1425,
1446)

By suggesting a standard of evaluation which contains both subjective and objective elements, we believe that the drafters of the code adequately achieved their dual goals of broadening the “heat of passion” doctrine to apply to a
wider range of circumstances while retaining some element of objectivity in the process.

p. 498

p.499
[The statute] offers the defendant a fair opportunity to seek mitigation without requiring that the trier of fact find mitigation in each case where an emotional disturbance is shown — or as the drafters put it, to offer “room for argument as to the
reasonableness of the explanations or excuses offered.” .. .

[M)he trial court, in this case, properly applied the statute. The court apparently accepted, as a factual matter, that defendant killed Miss Lo Consolo while under the influence of “extreme emotional disturbance,” a threshold question
which must be answered in the affirmative before any test of reasonableness is required. The court, however, also recognized that in exercising its function as trier of fact, it must make a further inquiry into the reasonableness of that disturbance.
In this regard, the court considered each of the mitigating factors put forward by defendant, including his claimed mental disability, but found that the excuse offered by defendant was so peculiar to him that it was unworthy of mitigation. The court
obviously made a sincere effort to understand defendant's “situation” and “the circumstances as defendant believed them to be,” but concluded that the murder in this case was the result of defendant's malevolence rather than an understandable
human response deserving of mercy. We cannot say, as a matter of law, that the court erred in so concluding. . ..

In our opinion, this statute would not require that the jury or the court as trier of fact find mitigation on any particular set of facts, but, rather, allows the finder of fact the opportunity to do so, such opportunity being conditional only upon
a finding of extreme emotional disturbance in the first instance. .. .

[Affirmed]

NOTES ON THE MODEL PENAL CODE

1. Influence of the MPC. Of 34 states that revised their penal codes in the post-MPC era, five adopted its provocation proposals almost verbatim (Arizona, Arkansas, Connecticut, Kentucky, and New York). At least a dozen others
adopted some of the Code’s features, usually the “extreme emotional disturbance” (EED) formulation, but with significant alterations, for example, requiring a provocative act and rejecting the “actor's situation” language in favor of a more general
“reasonableness” standard. Altogether, roughly 20 states now employ some version of the EED test. See Caroline Forell, Homicide and the Unreasonable Man, 72 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 597, 603 (2004).

2. Distinctive features of the MPC formula. What was the “provocation” in the Casassa case? Under the MPC standard, does emotional disturbance require manslaughter instructions even when the disturbance is not attributable
to any provocative behavior at all? Consider State v. White, 251 P.2d 820 (Utah 2011). After a troubled marriage, Brenda and Jon White divorced. Brenda won ownership of their house in the divorce settlement but had difficulty meeting the mort-

gage payments, in part because Jon allegedly failed to provide child support and other financial assistance. After mounting stress because of the financial difficulties and other problems, Brenda one day drove to Jon's place of work, and when he
‘emerged into the parking lot, she drove toward him at high speed, striking him twice with her vehicle and nearly killing him. In a prosecution for attempted

p.499

. 500
murder, she argued for an EED defense on the ground that mounting anger and grief had caused her to lose control of her emotions. An intermediate appellate court held that the defense was properly denied because “defendant's loss of control
[must] be in reaction to a highly provocative triggering event . .. contemporaneous with the defendant's loss of self-control.” The Utah Supreme Court reversed, holding that an EED defense may be based on “a significant mental trauma [that] has
affected the defendant's mind for a substantial period of time, simmering in the unknowing subconscious and then inexplicably coming to the fore.” Id. at 823, 827. Is this the correct interpretation of the MPC standard? If so, is the standard itself
too broad?

In State v. Eliot, 177 Conn. 1, 411 A.2d 3 (1979), the defendant had for years suffered from an overwhelming fear of his brother. One day, for no apparent reason, he appeared at his brother's house and killed him. His attempt to raise an
EED defense was denied at trial, and he was convicted of murder, but the Connecticut Supreme Court reversed, holding that under Connecticut's statute (based on the MPC), EED instructions were required. The court said:

[The defense does not require a provoking or triggering event. [T]o establish the “heat of passion” defense a defendant had to prove that the “hot blood” had not had time to “cool off” at the time of the killing. A homicide

influenced by an extreme emotional disturbance, in contrast, is not one which is necessarily committed in the “hot blood” stage, but rather one that was brought about by a significant mental trauma that caused the defen-

dant to brood for a long period of time and then react violently, seemingly without provocation.

QUESTION: If the traditional provocation formula and the EED test produce different results in cases like White and Elliot, which approach is preferable?

For a study of developments in MPC jurisdictions, see Victoria Nourse, Passion’s Progress: Modern Law Reform and the Provocation Defense, 106 Yale LJ. 1331 (1997). Professor Nourse concludes that the EED test aggravates the
provocation defense’s unfairness to women by greatly expanding the kinds of frictions in intimate settings that may suffice to reduce a killing from murder to manslaughter. A particularly disturbing scenario is the “separation killing,” which occurs
when a man reacts violently to his domestic partner's decision to move out or file for divorce. Professor Nourse found that trial courts frequently permitted defendants in such cases to present an EED claim to the jury, and that no appellate court
had held “separation” to be an insufficient basis for such a claim under the EED test. Id. at 1333. On the other hand, there is little evidence that juries find such claims convincing. See Gruber, p. 489 supra, at 310-311. One study of EED defenses
presented in New York over a ten-year period found that such claims were “very rarely successful.”2

Examples like White and Elliot nonetheless suggest that the EED test is arguably too broad, opening the door to possible mitigation where the traditional

. 500

p.501
common-law approach justifiably precludes it. But are there situations in which the common-law test is too narrow, precluding appropriate mitigation where the EED test would allow it? Consider Boyle v. State, 363 Ark. 356 (2005), where a
distraught defendant shot and killed his partner, because she suffered from severe physical ailments and lived in extreme pain. Does Boyle have a claim for mitigation to manslaughter under either the EED or common-law tests? Should Boyle have
claim for mitigation to manslaughter?

3. Roles of judge and jury. In People v. Walker, 473 N.Y.S.2d 460 (App. Div. 1984), the defendant, a drug dealer, received a $4,500 consignment of marijuana from his supplier, William Edmunds. He failed to pay Edmunds and claimed
that he had been robbed of the marijuana. In spite of the defendant's plea for additional consignments, Edmunds refused to supply him. One evening, the defendant encountered Edmunds in a restaurant. A witness heard an angry argument
between the two. Edmunds demanded his money, the defendant responded that he did not have any, and Edmunds then asked how he could afford to eat in the restaurant. The defendant replied that Edmunds should give him money, to which
Edmunds responded, “The only dough you're going to get is the dough in that bread.” The defendant was then heard to say, “Take your damn hand out of my plate,” after which he rose, gun in hand, and fired several shots in rapid succession,
killing Edmunds.

At Walker's trial on murder charges, the judge refused to instruct the jury on an extreme emotional disturbance defense. Was this error? The appellate court affirmed, but a dissenting judge commented:
From the evidence presented at the trial the jury could reasonably have found that the defendant killed the deceased in a burst of anger, that a smoldering sense of grievance had been ignited by insulting and contemptuous
words and actions. . ..
Once it is determined that there was “evidence of extreme emotional disturbance,” the controlling rule is clear . . .: “itis for the trier of fact to decide, in light of all the circumstances of the case, whether there
exists a reasonable explanation or excuse for the actor's mental condition.” (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, §210.3, p. 61.)...
This is not a sympathetic case. The plight of a narcotics dealer cut off from his source of supply, and then subjected to insulting and contemptuous words and actions by his former supplier, is not likely to evoke
widespread feelings of acute compassion. Nevertheless, it is clear that the controlling statutory sections were carefully designed to permit the essential judgment on the kind of issue presented here to be made by jurors on
the basis of all the circumstances, and not by the trial judge as a matter of law.
c. The Reasonable Person Requirement
NOTES
The common-law and MPC approaches both require an objective element — not every defendant who flies off the handle and kills is a candidate for
p.s01
p.502
the provocation defense. The loss of self-control must in some sense be “reasonable.” What does that mean? Consider the following:
1. The MPC solution. The MPC test is whether the defendant acted “under the influence of extreme emotional disturbance for which there is reasonable explanation or excuse.” The Code then requires this determination to be made
“from the viewpoint of a person in the actor's situation under the circumstances as he believes them to be.” The Reporter's Comments explain (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.3 at 62-63 (1980)):
The word “situation” is designedly ambiguous. On the one hand, it is clear that personal handicaps and some external circumstances must be taken into account. Thus, blindness, shock from traumatic injury, and extreme
grief are all easily read into the term “situation” . . . for it would be morally obtuse to appraise a crime for mitigation of punishment without reference to these factors. On the other hand, it is equally plain that idiosyncratic
moral values are not part of the actor's situation. An assassin who kills a political leader because he believes it is right to do so cannot ask that he be judged by the standard of a reasonable extremist. Any other result would
undermine the normative message of the criminal law. In between these two extremes, however, there are matters neither as clearly distinct from individual blameworthiness as blindness . . . nor as integral a part of moral
depravity as a belief in the rightness of killing. . . . The proper role of such factors cannot be resolved satisfactorily by abstract definition. . .. The Model Code endorses a formulation that affords sufficient flexibility to differ-
entiate in particular cases between those special aspects of the actor's situation that should be deemed material for purpose of grading and those that should be ignored. There thus will be room for interpretation of the word
“situation,” and that is precisely the flexibility desired. . . . In the end, the question is whether the actor's loss of self-control can be understood in terms that arouse sympathy in the ordinary citizen. Section 210.3 . . . leaves
[this] judgment to the ordinary citizen in the function of a juror. . .
2. Problems. Is “the flexibility desired” in the MPC formula a good thing, or does it put too much faith in the jury's ability to make unbiased decisions? Should the jury instead be allowed to consider, as Professor Jonathan Witmer-Rich
proposes (The Heat of Passion and Blameworthy Reasons to Be Angry, 55 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 409 (2018), only “features, beliefs, or characteristics of a defendant” that are not in themselves “blameworthy belieffs] or attribute[s]"? Consider how the
common-law and MPC reasonableness standards would deal with the following special circumstances:

(a) Culture. Should the defendant's nationality and cultural background be taken into account? Suppose that the defendant recently emigrated from a country where the provoking circumstances (e.g., marital infidelity or a particular
insult) are regarded as far more serious than they are in the United States. Suppose that ordinary people in the immigrant’s country are far more likely to respond violently to such circumstances. Should the defendant's response be assessed from
the perspective of the reasonable person of the defendant's own cultural background? Or

p.502
p. 503
is it more appropriate to hold the defendant to the standards of self-control that our society expects Americans to exercise?

In The Queen v. Zhang, [2011] N.ILC.A. 25 (N. Ire. Ct. App)), the defendant had been brought up in China, spoke no English, and lived within the Chinese community in Dublin. When his girlfriend admitted that she had been working as
a prostitute, he killed her in a rage. An expert witness for the defense testified that in light of his upbringing and “the concept of face” as understood in Chinese society, her admission was “tantamount to throwing down a gauntlet, challenging his
manhood,” and that its effect on a person of his background would be quite different from the effect of such an admission on others in Northern Ireland. The trial judge initially permitted the jury to hear this testimony but ultimately told the jury that
the expert's testimony was not relevant to the question whether “an ordinary man of ordinary self-control would have done what the appellant did.” The court of appeal upheld this instruction and affirmed a conviction for murder. Is this the appro-
priate standard for assessing whether the circumstances warrant mitigation? Compare the views of an Australian justice, dissenting in Masciantonio v. R., 129 Austr. L.R. 575 (High Court Australia, 1995):

Without incorporating [the general characteristics of an ordinary person of the same age, race, culture, and background as the accused on the self-control issue] the law of provocation is likely to result in discrimination and

injustice. In a multicultural society such as Australia, invocation [of the reasonable-man standard] in cases heard by juries of predominately Anglo-Saxon-Celtic origin almost certainly results in the accused being judged

by the standard of self-control attributed to a middle class Australian of Anglo-Saxon-Celtic heritage. . . . If it is objected that [incorporating the characteristics of an ordinary person of the same cultural background as the

accused] will result in one law of provocation for one class of persons and another law for a different class, | would answer that that must be the natural consequence of true equality before the law in a multicultural society

when the criterion of criminal liability is made to depend upon objective standards of personhood.

QUESTIONS: Does the suggested approach — incorporating the characteristics of an ordinary person of the same cultural background as the accused — eliminate discrimination against members of the ethnic minority, or is this approach itself
discriminatory? Does it advantage or disadvantage members of that ethnic minority? See James M. Donovan & John Stuart Garth, Delimiting the Culture Defense, 26 Quinnipiac L. Rev. 109, 110 (2007). Compare the problem of cultural background
in administering the mistake-of-law defense, p. 374 supra.

(b) Battered women. In State v. McClain, 591 A.2d 652 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1991), the defendant shot and killed the man with whom she had lived for nine years in a troubled relationship. Though the man had not physically
assaulted her for several years (there had been two beating incidents, several years apart, earlier in the relationship), a psychologist testified that the defendant suffered from battered woman syndrome because a series of psychological humilia-
tions had triggered a mental “breakdown” and led to the killing. The court held that evidence relating to the defendant's status as a battered woman was “irrelevant on the

p. 503
p. 504
question of whether the victim's conduct was adequately provocative because that inquiry requires application of the ‘reasonable person’ test.” In accord, see J.C.S., Comment on R. v. Thornton, [1996] Crim. L. Rev. 597, 598:

The concept of an ordinary person suffering from a personality disorder and battered woman syndrome is a difficult one. It could be . . . put to the jury in some such form as: “If you think that she may in fact have lost her self-

control, you must not convict of murder unless you are sure that a woman, suffering from this personality disorder and from battered woman syndrome but otherwise an ordinary woman, exercising such restraint as could

reasonably be expected of a woman in that condition, would not have lost her self-control and done what the accused did.” But this seems substantially to abandon the notion of the reasonable or ordinary person.

For criticism of this approach, see Lawrence S. Lustberg & John V. Jacobi, The Battered Woman as a Reasonable Person: A Critique of the Appellate Division Decision in State v. McClain, 22 Seton Hall L. Rev. 365 (1992). See also State
v. Felton, 329 N.W.2d 161, 172-173 (Wis. 1983): “It is proper in applying the objective test . . . to consider how other persons similarly situated with respect to that type, or that history, of provocation would react. [T]he objective test may be satisfied
by considering the situation of the ordinary person who is a battered spouse.” Beyond allowing the defense in these terms, one might think that domestic violence survivors who kill their batterers are stronger candidates for mitigation than people
who kill their partners or their partners’ lovers out of jealousy or anger. Professor Caroline Forell argues (Domestic Homicides: The Continuing Search for Justice, 25 Am. U. J. Gender Soc. Pol'y & L. 1, 3 (2017)) that “parallel use of provocation for
domestic killings out of jealous rage and domestic killings out of fear of continuing physical violence is unfair and immoral.”

QUESTIONS: Should defendants’ situations include the fact of having been battered, the fact that they suffer from a battering syndrome, both, or neither? The problem of battering syndromes is explored at greater length in Chapter 8, infra.

(c) Mental disorder. In State v. Klimas, 288 N.W.2d 157 (Wis. Ct. App. 1979), the defendant, after months of intense conflict with his wife, shot and killed her. He claimed to be distraught over the disintegration of his marriage, his wife's
relationship with another man, and her efforts to obtain a divorce. He sought to introduce psychiatric testimony to the effect that he had been suffering severe depression, that events on the day preceding the killing had “overwhelmed” him, and
that although not legally insane, he was “a desperate man overwhelmed by a psychotic depressive illness.” The defendant apparently sought to have his conduct assessed from the perspective of a person in that emotional situation. The trial judge
ruled

p. 508

p. 505
the psychiatric evidence irrelevant and therefore inadmissible. In another case, the court held inadmissible the proffered evidence that the defendant was a traumatized Vietnam veteran who had just “snapped” when he heard the sound of an
approaching helicopter. People v. Steele, 47 P.3d 225 (Cal. 2002). Are these rulings sound? On what principle?

3. Partial individualization? In D.P.P. v. Camplin, [1978] A.C. 705, a 15-year-old murder defendant had killed an older man in response to sexual abuse and taunting. The trial judge instructed the jury that in applying the reasonable-
ness standard, they had to consider whether “the provocation was sufficient to make a reasonable man in like circumstances act as the defendant did. Not a reasonable boy, as [counsel for Camplin] would have it, .. .; it is an objective test — a
reasonable man.” The House of Lords held these instructions erroneous. It ruled that in considering the gravity of the provoking words or actions, the reasonable man should be assumed to share “such of the accused's characteristics as they
think would affect the gravity of the provocation to him.” However, in considering the self-control to be exercised, the jury was to apply the standard of a “person having the power of self-control to be expected of an ordinary person of the age and
sex of the accused,” without regard to any other special characteristics of the defendant.

The case for considering personal characteristics of the defendant in determining the gravity of the provocation was explained in one of the Camplin opinions as follows: “[The] expression . . . ‘Your character is as crooked as your back’
would have a different connotation to a hunchback . . . and to a man with a back like a ramrod.” The case for not considering personal characteristics in determining the required level of self-control is likewise readily explicable: The law could not
allow an exceptionally angry or aggressive person to exercise less self-control than everyone else. But why should the expected degree of self-control be individualized for “the age and sex of the accused”?

(@) With respect to age, the House of Lords said that “to require old heads on young shoulders is inconsistent with the law's compassion [for] human infirmity.” If that point is well taken, shouldn't it apply to other unchosen and im-
mutable characteristics, like cultural upbringing (reconsider The Queen v. Zhang, p. 503 supra) or a life-long history of anger-control issues?

(b) With respect to gender, the Camplin opinions gave no explanation for mandating an individualized standard of self-control. What is the justification for that feature of the decision? And justified or not, what does it mean? Is the
required degree of self-control higher for women than for men, or vice versa? Does public opinion generally expect men and women to abide by different standards of self-control? And if so, should the law endorse those expectations?

(c) These difficulties aside, is it feasible to distinguish between personal characteristics relevant to gravity and those relevant to self-control? In Regina v. Smith (Morgan), [2001] 1 A.C. 146, a clinically depressed alcoholic stabbed and
killed a friend who had stolen from him. Under the Camplin approach, the trial judge was required to instruct the jury that it should first consider the defendant's depression and alcoholism in judging the seriousness of the provocation, and then
ask how a person with ordinary powers of self-control would have reacted. The “reasonable” person, in other words, was a clinically depressed alcoholic with ordinary powers of self-control. Faced with that prospect, the House of Lords altered
course. Noting that the Camplin formula produced “glazed looks” in jurors’ eyes, the House of

p. 505

p. 506
Lords held that the jury should simply be left to decide whether in all the circumstances “there was some characteristic of the accused . . . which it would be unjust not to take into account.”

Is this a satisfactory way to preserve an objective but suitably individualized standard? Smith (Morgan) was sharply criticized for inviting “an evaluative free-for-all in which anything that induces sympathy by the same token helps to
‘excuse [and] little more than lip-service is paid to the all-important objective (impersonal) standard of the reasonable person.” John Gardner & Timothy Macklen, Compassion Without Respect? Nine Fallacies in R. Smith, [2001] Crim. L. Rev. 623,
635.

(d) Responding to such criticism, Parliament endorsed a return to the Camplin approach: The statute now permits a provocation defense only when a defendant D can show that his loss of control was the result of “a justifiable sense of
being seriously wronged.”° The necessary loss of control is established if “a person of D’s sex and age, with a normal degree of tolerance and self-restraint and in [all of D's circumstances other than those whose only relevance to D’s conduct is
that they bear on D’s general capacity for tolerance or self-restraint], might have reacted in the same or in a similar way to D.”2

4, Problem. In Regina v. Morhall, [1996] 1 A.C. 90, a drug addict, taunted about his addiction, killed the person who was mocking him. How should the relevance of his drug addiction be explained to the jury charged with deciding
whether the circumstances qualify for mitigation to manslaughter? Does the British test quoted above or the MPC approach provide a better framework for grading the severity of punishment in such a case?

C. LEGISLATIVE GRADING OF UNINTENDED KILLINGS

1. The Creation of Homicidal Risk

Unintended killings present questions of both criminalization and grading. Section C.1.a deals with the criteria for establishing criminal, as opposed to solely civil, liability for unintended homicide. Section C.1.b deals with the question
whether criminal liability for unintended homicide should rest on a subjective or objective standard. Section C.1.c considers the special circumstances that may make an unintended killing murder.

a. Distinguishing Civil and Criminal Liability
Commonwealth v. Welansky
Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court
55 N.E.2d 902 (Mass. 1944)
Lummus, J. On November 28, 1942, and for about nine years before that day, a corporation named New Cocoanut Grove, Inc., maintained and operated a “night
p. 506
p.507
club” in Boston. . .. The corporation, its officers and employees, and its business, were completely dominated by the defendant Barnett Welansky. . . .

The defendant was accustomed to spend his evenings at the night club, inspecting the premises and superintending the business. On November 16, 1942, he became suddenly ill, and was carried to a hospital, where [he] remained until
discharged on December 11, 1942. . . . There is no evidence of any act, omission or condition at the night club on November 28, 1942 (apart from the lighting of a match hereinafter described), that was not within the usual and regular practice dur-
ing the time before the defendant was taken ill. . . .

The physical arrangement of the night club on November 28, 1942, as well as on November 16, 1942, when the defendant last had personal knowledge of it, was as follows. [The only entrance to the club was through a single revolving
door. Various rooms were connected by narrow passageways and corridors to one another and to various exits. Three emergency exits were in obscure locations, poorly marked and accessible only to knowledgeable employees. The court ob-
served that an emergency escape “would be difficult for a patron not thoroughly familiar with parts of the premises not ordinarily open to him.” Two other emergency exits were marked by “Exit” lights and equipped with panic bars, but one of the
two was blocked by a screen and dining tables; the other was regularly kept locked, and the court noted that “if that door should be left so that it could be opened by means of the panic bar, a patron might leave through that door without paying
his bill.”]

A\little after ten o'clock on the evening of Saturday, November 28, 1942, the night club was well filled with a crowd of patrons. It was during the busiest season of the year. An important football game in the afternoon had attracted many
visitors to Boston. [T]here were from two hundred fifty to four hundred persons in the Melody Lounge, from four hundred to five hundred in the main dining room and the Caricature Bar, and two hundred fifty in the Cocktail Lounge. . ..

A bartender in the Melody Lounge noticed that an electric light bulb which was in or near the cocoanut husks of an artificial palm tree in the corer had been turned off and that the corner was dark. He directed a sixteen-year-old bar
boy who was waiting on customers at the tables to cause the bulb to be lighted. [The bar boy lit a match to see the bulb, turned the bulb in its socket to light it, and blew out the match. The flame of the match ignited a palm tree, which in turn ig-
nited a low cloth ceiling nearby.] The fire spread with great rapidity. . . . The crowd were panic stricken, and rushed and pushed in every direction through the night club, screaming, and overtuming tables and chairs in their attempts to escape.

The door at the head of the Melody Lounge stairway was not opened until firemen broke it down from outside [and found it locked], so that the panic bar could not operate. . . . The head waiter and another waiter tried to get open the
panic doors from the main dining room to Shawmut Street, and succeeded after some difficulty. The other two doors to Shawmut Street were locked, and were opened by force from outside by firemen and others. . . . A considerable number of pa-
trons escaped through the Broadway door, but many died just inside that door. Some employees, and a great number of patrons, died in the fire.

[Defendant was charged with numerous counts of involuntary manslaughter based on overcrowding, installation of flammable decorations, absence of fire

p.507
p. 508
doors, and failure to maintain proper means of egress. He was found guilty and sentenced to a term of not less than 12 years and not more than 15 years, the first day of the term to be in solitary confinement and the residue at hard labor.]

The Commonwealth disclaimed any contention that the defendant intentionally killed or injured the persons named in the indictments as victims. It based its case on involuntary manslaughter through wanton or reckless conduct. The
judge instructed the jury correctly with respect to the nature of such conduct.

Usually wanton or reckless conduct consists of an affirmative act, like driving an automobile or discharging a firearm, in disregard of probable harmful consequences to another. But where as in the present case there is a duty of care
for the safety of business visitors invited to premises which the defendant controls, wanton or reckless conduct may consist of intentional failure to take such care in disregard of the probable harmful consequences to them or of their right to care.

To define wanton or reckless conduct so as to distinguish it clearly from negligence and gross negligence is not easy. Sometimes the word “wilful” is prefaced to the words “wanton” and “reckless” in expressing the concept. That only
blurs it. Wilful means intentional. In the phrase “wilful, wanton or reckless conduct,” if “wilful” modifies “conduct” it introduces something different from wanton or reckless conduct, even though the legal result is the same. Wilfully causing harm is
a wrong, but a different wrong from wantonly or recklessly causing harm. If “wilful” modifies “wanton or reckless conduct” its use is accurate. What must be intended is the conduct, not the resulting harm. The words “wanton” and “reckless” are
practically synonymous in this connection, although the word “wanton” may contain a suggestion of arrogance or insolence or heartlessness that is lacking in the word “reckless.” But intentional conduct to which either word applies is followed by
the same legal consequences as though both words applied... .

The judge charged the jury correctly when he said, “To constitute wanton or reckless conduct, as distinguished from mere negligence, grave danger to others must have been apparent and the defendant must have chosen to run the
risk rather than alter his conduct so as to avoid the act or omission which caused the harm. If the grave danger was in fact realized by the defendant, his subsequent voluntary act or omission which caused the harm amounts to wanton or reckless
conduct, no matter whether the ordinary man would have realized the gravity of the danger or not. But even if a particular defendant is so stupid (or) so heedless . . . that in fact he did not realize the grave danger, he cannot escape the imputation
of wanton or reckless conduct in his dangerous act or omission, if an ordinary normal man under the same circumstances would have realized the gravity of the danger. A man may be reckless within the meaning of the law although he himself
thought he was careful.”

The essence of wanton or reckless conduct is intentional conduct, by way either of commission or of omission where there is a duty to act, which conduct involves a high degree of likelihood that substantial harm will result to another.
Wanton or reckless conduct amounts to what has been variously described as indifference to or disregard of probable consequences to that other. . . .
The words “wanton” and “reckless” are thus not merely rhetorical, vituperative expressions used instead of negligent or grossly negligent. They express a difference in the degree of risk and in the voluntary taking of risk so marked, as
p. 508
p.509
compared with negligence, as to amount substantially and in the eyes of the law to a difference in kind. . ..
Notwithstanding language used commonly in earlier cases, and occasionally in later ones, it is now clear in this Commonwealth that at common law conduct does not become criminal until it passes the borders of negligence and gross
negligence and enters into the domain of wanton or reckless conduct. There is in Massachusetts at common law no such thing as “criminal negligence.” . .
To convict the defendant of manslaughter, the Commonwealth was not required to prove that he caused the fire by some wanton or reckless conduct. Fire in a place of public resort is an ever present danger. It was enough to prove that
death resulted from his wanton or reckless disregard of the safety of patrons in the event of fire from any cause.
[Alffirmed.
NOTES AND QUESTIONS
1. The traditional tests. Does Welansky offer a reasonably clear statement of the difference between the ordinary negligence that suffices for civil tort liability and the more culpable kind required for criminal liability? What are the
distinctive features of actions that “[pass] the borders of negligence and gross negligence and [enter] into the domain of wanton and reckless conduct”? Is “wanton and reckless conduct” in Massachusetts different from ordinary civil negligence?
Reaffirming the Welansky formula, Commonwealth v. Pugh, 969 N.E.2d 672, 685 (Mass. 2012) explains: “Proof of recklessness requires ‘more than a mistake of judgment or even gross negligence’. . .. Wanton or reckless conduct is determined
based either on the defendant's specific knowledge or on what a reasonable person should have known in the circumstances. [T]he defendant's actions constitute ‘wanton or reckless conduct . . . if an ordinary normal [woman] under the same cir-
cumstances would have realized the gravity of the danger’ [citing Welansky].”
The Welansky court states that wanton and reckless conduct requires “a high degree of likelihood” of injury to another. Was there such a likelihood in Welansky? What was the statistical likelihood that a raging fire would break out at a
time when the club was filled to capacity? What does “likelihood” mean? Consider the following explanations:
REX v. BATEMAN, 19 CRIM. APP. 8, 11-12(1925): In explaining to juries the test that they should apply to determine whether the negligence, in the particular case, amounted or did not amount to a crime, judges have used many epithets such as
“culpable,” “gross,” “wicked,” “clear,” “complete.” But whatever epithet be used and whether an epithet be used or not, in order to establish criminal liability the facts must be such that, in the opinion of the jury, the negligence of the accused went
beyond a mere matter of compensation between subjects and showed such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to a crime against the State and conduct deserving punishment.
STATE v. BARNETT, 63 S.E.2D 57, 58-59 (S.C. 1951): The degree of negligence necessary to establish criminal liability has perplexed the courts of England and America for centuries. . . . In the early development of the criminal law in England
p.509
p.510
it was held that ordinary negligence, that is, the failure to exercise due care, was sufficient. Later it was found that this rule was too harsh. A noted English authority observed that an accident brought about by an act of ordinary negligence “may
be the lot of even the wisest and the best of mankind.” The English courts finally concluded that more carelessness was required to create criminal liability than civil but they found it difficult to determine “how much more.” [In the United States] it
is now generally held that the negligence of the accused must be “culpable,” “gross,” or “reckless,” that is, the conduct of the accused must be such a departure from what would be the conduct of an ordinarily prudent or careful man under the

same circumstances as to be incompatible with a proper regard for human life, or conduct amounting to an indifference to consequences. In perhaps a majority of the states, the offense of involuntary manslaughter is now defined by statute. Al-
though variously worded, these statutes, with a few exceptions, have been construed as requiring gross negligence or recklessness.
JEROME HALL, GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF CRIMINAL LAW 124 (2d ed. 1960): [Judicial opinions defining criminal negligence] run in terms of “wanton and wilful negligence,” “gross negligence,” and more illuminating yet, “that degree of negligence
that is more than the negligence required to impose tort liability.” The apex of this infelicity is “wilful, wanton negligence,” which suggest a triple contradiction — “negligence” implying inadvertence; “wilful,” intention; and “wanton,” recklessness.

2. Problem. Cal. Penal Code §192(b) defines involuntary manslaughter (in cases not involving vehicular homicide) to include deaths that result from an act committed “without due caution and circumspection.” See p. 464 supra. Under
the appropriate principles of statutory interpretation, should this language be construed to require gross negligence or to impose criminal liability for ordinary civil negligence? See People v. Penny, 285 P.2d 926, 937 (Cal. 1955); People v. Butler,
114 Cal. Rptr. 3d 696, 711 (Ct. App. 2010).

3. Contributory negligence. Notwithstanding the ambiguity of the line between civil and criminal negligence, one difference is clear. In civil cases, the deceased's contributory negligence is usually at least a partial defense, involving
an assessment of comparative negligence, and sometimes it is a complete defense. In criminal cases, however, the deceased's contributory negligence or other misconduct has never afforded a defense. In Dickerson v. State, 441 So. 2d 536
(Miss. 1983), the defendant drove his car into another car and Killed its drunken driver, who had stopped the car with its lights off in the middle of the road. Commenting on the import of this evidence, the court observed (id. at 538):

Contributory negligence is not a defense to manslaughter. All that the state must prove with respect to the victim is that he was prior to the incident a live human being. The homicide laws of this State protect all living beings

within the jurisdiction, sinners as well as saints, drunks as well as deacons.

Note, however, that although contributory negligence does not itself afford a defense as it often would in a civil case, it may bear on the question whether the defendant's conduct was a proximate cause of the death. State v. Brammer,
343 P.3d 75, 82 (Kan. 2015). See the material on causation in Chapter 6, infra.

p.510
psi

4. The MPC alternative. The MPC creates two crimes, manslaughter (§210.3) and a lesser crime, negligent homicide (§210.4), distinguished by whether defendants are aware of the unwarranted risks they create. A killing is man-
slaughter if an actor was “reckless,” that is, if he “consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his conduct would cause the death of another”; and if the risk was “of such a nature and degree that, considering the nature and
purpose of his conduct and the circumstances known to him, its disregard involves a gross deviation from the standard of conduct that a law-abiding person would observe in the actor's situation.” By contrast, a killing is negligent homicide when
a person should have been aware of such a risk.
QUESTIONS: The MPC distinction between unintentional killings that are criminal and those that are not (found in its definition of negligent homicide) is designed to avoid the epithets typical in earlier formulations and thereby to give greater
guidance to the jury. Does it succeed? Are juries apt to reach better and more consistent conclusions if they are asked to decide according to the MPC standard than if they are asked whether conduct was “culpable and gross”? Could the MPC.
drafters have done a better job?

Annumber of modem statutory revisions have followed the MPC. The following case illustrates the MPC formula in action.
People v. Hall

‘Supreme Court of Colorado
999 P.2d 207 (2000)

BENpéR, J.: While skiing on Vail mountain, Hall flew off of a knoll and collided with Allen Cobb, who was traversing the slope below Hall. Cobb sustained traumatic brain injuries and died as a result of the collision. The People charged
Hall with felony reckless manslaughter.

Ata preliminary hearing to determine whether there was probable cause for the felony count, the county court found that Hall's conduct “did not rise to the level of dangerousness” required under Colorado law to uphold a conviction for
manslaughter, and the court dismissed the charges. [Colorado statutes followed the MPC definitions of manslaughter and negligent homicide.] On appeal, [t]he district court determined that in order for Hall's conduct to have been reckless, it must
have been “at least more likely than not” that death would result. Because the court found that “skiing too fast for the conditions” is not “likely” to cause another person's death, the court concluded that Hall's conduct did not constitute a “sub-
stantial and unjustifiable” risk of death. Thus, the district court affirmed the finding of no probable cause.

The charge of reckless manslaughter requires that a person “recklessly cause the death of another person.”§18-3-104(1)(a). For his conduct to be reckless, the actor must have consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that death could result from his actions. See §18-1-501(8). . ..

pstt
p.5i2

The district court’s conclusion that Hall's conduct did not represent a substantial and unjustifiable risk of death rested on an erroneous construction of recklessness. . .. [A] risk of death that has less than a fifty percent chance of
occurring may nonetheless be a substantial risk depending on the circumstances of the particular case. Because this case was dismissed at the preliminary hearing, we must consider the facts in the light most favorable to the prosecution and we
must draw all inferences against the defendant... .

Like other activities that generally do not involve a substantial risk of death, such as driving a car . . . “skiing too fast for the conditions” is not widely considered behavior that constitutes a high degree of risk. However, we hold that the
specific facts in this case support a reasonable inference that Hall created a substantial and unjustifiable risk that he would cause another's death.

Several . . . eyewitnesses all said that Hall was travelling too fast for the conditions. . . . All the witnesses said Hall. . . was skiing straight down the fall line. Hall was back on his skis, with his ski tips in the air and his arms out to his sides
to maintain balance. [A witness, himself a ski instructor] said that Hall was bounced around by the moguls on the slope rather than skiing in control and managing the bumps. Hall admitted . .. that he first saw Cobb when he was airborne and that
he was unable to stop when he saw people below him just before the collision. Hence, in addition to finding that Hall was skiing at a very high rate of speed, a reasonably prudent person could have concluded that Hall was unable to anticipate or
avoid a potential collision with a skier on the trail below him.

While skiing ordinarily carries a very low risk of death to other skiers, a reasonable person [i.e., a reasonable juror — Eps] could have concluded that Hall’s excessive speed, lack of control, and improper technique for skiing bumps
significantly increased both the likelihood that a collision would occur and the extent of the injuries that might result from such a collision, including the possibility of death, in the event that a person like Cobb unwittingly crossed Hall’s downhill
path. [Another experienced witness] testified that he was aware of only two other deaths from skier collisions on Vail mountain in the past eleven years, but a reasonable person could have determined that Hall's conduct was precisely the type of
skiing that risked this rare result.

We next ask whether a reasonable [juror] could have concluded that Hall's creation of a substantial risk of death was unjustified. To the extent that Hall’s extremely fast and unsafe skiing created a risk of death, Hall was serving no direct
interest other than his own enjoyment. Although the sport often involves high speeds and even moments where a skier is temporarily out of control, a reasonable [juror] could determine that the enjoyment of skiing does not justify skiing at the
speeds and with the lack of control Hall exhibited. Thus, a reasonable [juror] could have found that Hall's creation of a substantial risk was unjustifiable.

In addition to our conclusion that a reasonable [juror] could have entertained the belief that Hall's conduct created a substantial and unjustifiable risk, we must ask whether Hall's conduct constituted a “gross deviation” from the stan-
dard of care that a reasonable law-abiding person (in this case, a reasonable, law-abiding, trained ski racer and resort employee) would have observed in the circumstances,

p.si2
519
[as opposed to the kind of deviation from the reasonable standard of care that results in civil liability for ordinary negligence.12} . . .

[T]he nature of the sport involves moments of high speeds and temporary losses of control. However, the General Assembly [enacted a statute imposing] upon a skier the duty to avoid collisions with any person or object below him.
Although this statute may not form the basis of criminal liability, it establishes the minimum standard of care for uphill skiers and, for the purposes of civil negligence suits, creates a rebuttable presumption that the skier is at fault whenever he
collides with skiers on the slope below him. A violation of a skier’s duty in an extreme fashion, such as here, may be evidence of conduct that constitutes a “gross deviation” from the standard of care imposed by statute for civil negligence. Hall
admitted . . . that as he flew off a knoll, he saw people below him but was unable to stop; Hall was travelling so fast and with so little control that he could not possibly have respected his obligation to avoid skiers below him on the slope. Addition-
ally, Hall skied in this manner for some time over a considerable distance, demonstrating that his high speeds and lack of control were not the type of momentary lapse of control or inherent danger associated with skiing... .

[We next ask whether a reasonably prudent person [i.e., a reasonable juror — Eps.] could have entertained the belief that Hall consciously disregarded that risk. Hall is a trained ski racer who had been coached about skiing in control
and skiing safely. Further, he was an employee of a ski area and had a great deal of skiing experience. Hall’s knowledge and training could give rise to the reasonable inference that he was aware of the possibility that by skiing so fast and out of
control he might collide with and kill another skier unless he regained control and slowed down... .

Thus, interpreting the facts presented in the light most favorable to the prosecution, we hold that a reasonably prudent and cautious person could have entertained the belief that Hall consciously disregarded a substantial and unjustifi-
able risk that by skiing exceptionally fast and out of control he might collide with and kill another person on the slope.

Obviously, this opinion does not address whether Hall is ultimately guilty of any crime. Rather, we hold only that the People presented sufficient evidence to establish probable cause that Hall committed reckless manslaughter, and the
court should have bound Hall's case over for trial.

NOTES
1. The outcome in Hall. In a subsequent trial, a jury composed entirely of skiers and snowboarders rejected the charge of reckless manslaughter and convicted
p.5t3
p.5i4
only of negligent homicide, which carried a sentence of up to three years’ imprisonment.12 Hall was sentenced to a 90-day jail term. See Editorial, Skier Penalty Warranted, Denv. Post, Feb. 6, 2001, at B10. A juror, who identified herself as one of
the last holdouts, said the jurors agreed that “going fast is not a gross deviation, . . . and being out-of-control is not a gross deviation,” but said she was convinced to vote for conviction because “the gross deviation was that a beginner skier [was]
hit from behind by . . . one who is employed on the mountain and therefore has a mandate . . ., more than anybody else, to protect the people on the mountain.” See Steve Lipsher, Ski Verdict Tough, Juror Says Hall's Ability Decided Matter, Denv.
Post, Nov. 20, 2000, at B1. For a close analysis of the issues in Hall and other prosecutions for deaths that occur in the course of risky recreational activities, see Carolyn B. Ramsey, Homicide on Holiday: Prosecutorial Discretion, Popular Culture,
and the Boundaries of the Criminal Law, 54 Hastings L.J. 1641 (2003).

2. Awareness. The argument for imposing a lower punishment when the actor was not aware of creating an unjustified risk is that the actor is less culpable than the person who does have this awareness. But should it matter why the
defendant lacks awareness? For example, compare three skiers A, B, and C. A loses control because A doesn't (but should) realize that conditions are icy.B knows that conditions are icy and skis anyway because B is a self-described hot-shot
skier, but B loses control because B's skiing skills are not as exceptional as B supposed. Skier C knows that the danger is substantial but figures that taking risks is part of the good life and hence justifiable. Which of the three skiers was reckless?
If the reasons for unawareness matter, how should the definitions of recklessness and negligence be changed to take account of them?

b. Objectivity and Individualization in Criminal Negligence
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

One may ask two major questions about the offense of negligent homicide: its justification and its definition.

(@) Justification. Are the MPC and most American jurisdictions right to punish inadvertent (negligent) killing? Is it ever justified to convict people of a homicidal crime when they did not realize that their actions were dangerous?

(b) Definition. Even if punishment for negligence can sometimes be justified, how should the jury determine whether a defendant was negligent? The standard, in principle, is that of the reasonable person in the circumstances.

But what circumstances should be considered? Do they include the competence and capabilities of the particular defendant? Or should the law apply a single invariant standard for all, regardless of a particular defendant's ability to meet that
standard?

The following case provides a setting for examining both problems — justification and definition.

psi
p.516
State v. Williams
Washington Court of Appeals
484 P.2d 1167 (Wash. Ct. App. 1971)

Horowitz, C.J. Defendants, husband and wife, were charged [with] manslaughter for negligently failing to supply their 17-month child with necessary medical attention, as a result of which he died on September 12, 1968. Upon entry of
findings, conclusions and judgment of guilty, sentences were imposed. . . .2 Defendants appeal.

The defendant husband, Walter Williams, is a 24-year-old full-blooded Shoshon[e] Indian with a sixth-grade education. His sole occupation is that of laborer. The defendant wife, Bernice Williams, is a 20-year-old part Indian with an 11th
grade education. At the time of the marriage, the wife had two children, the younger of whom was a 14-month-old son. Both parents worked and the children were cared for by the . . . mother of the defendant husband. The defendant husband as-
sumed parental responsibility with the defendant wife to provide clothing, care and medical attention for the child. Both defendants possessed a great deal of love and affection for the defendant wife's young son. The court expressly found:

That both defendants were aware that William Joseph Tabafunda was ill during the period September 1, 1968, to September 12, 1968. The defendants were ignorant. They did not realize how sick the baby was. They thought

that the baby had a toothache and no layman regards a toothache as dangerous to life. They loved the baby and gave it aspirin in hopes of improving its condition. They did not take the baby to a doctor because of fear that

the Welfare Department would take the baby away from them. They knew that medical help was available because of previous experience. They had no excuse that the law will recognize for not taking the baby to a doctor.

The defendants Walter L. Williams and Bernice J. Williams were negligent in not seeking medical attention for William Joseph Tabafunda.
That as a proximate result of this negligence, William Joseph Tabafunda died.

From these and other findings, the [trial] court concluded that the defendants were each guilty of the crime of manslaughter as charged. . . .

[The appellate court held that both defendants were under a legal duty to obtain medical assistance for the child.] On the question of the quality or seriousness of breach of the duty, at common law, in the case of involuntary manslaugh-
ter, the breach had to amount to more than mere ordinary or simple negligence — gross negligence was essential. . . . Under [Washington] statutes [however] the crime is deemed committed even though the death of the victim is the proximate
result of only simple or ordinary negligence. . . .

The concept of simple or ordinary negligence describes a failure to exercise the “ordinary caution” necessary to make out the defense of excusable homicide.

p.5t6

Ordinary caution is the kind of caution that a man of reasonable prudence would exercise under the same or similar conditions. If, therefore, the conduct of a defendant, regardless of his ignorance, good intentions and good faith, fails to measure
up to the conduct required of a man of reasonable prudence, he is guilty of ordinary negligence because of his failure to use “ordinary caution.” . . . If such negligence proximately causes the death of the victim, the defendant . . . is guilty of statu-
tory manslaughter. . . .

The remaining issue of proximate cause requires consideration of the question of when the duty to furnish medical care became activated. If the duty to furnish such care was not activated until after it was too late to save the life of the
child, failure to furnish medical care could not be said to have proximately caused the child's death. Timeliness in the furnishing of medical care also must be considered in terms of “ordinary caution.” [T]he duty as formulated in People v. Pierson,
176 N.Y. 201, 68 N.E. 243 (1903) . . . properly defines the duty contemplated by our manslaughter statutes... . The court there said: “We quite agree that the Code does not contemplate the necessity of calling a physician for every trifling complaint
with which the child may be afflicted, which in most instances may be overcome by the ordinary household nursing by members of the family; that a reasonable amount of discretion is vested in parents, charged with the duty of maintaining and
bringing up infant children; and that the standard is at what time would an ordinarily prudent person, solicitous for the welfare of his child and anxious to promote its recovery, deem it necessary to call in the services of a physician.”

It remains to apply the law discussed to the facts of the instant case.

. .. Because of the serious nature of the charge against the parent and step-parent of a well-loved child, and out of our concern for the protection of the constitutional rights of the defendants, we have made an independent examination
of the evidence to determine whether it substantially supports the court's express finding on proximate cause and its implied finding that the duty to furnish medical care became activated in time to prevent death of the child. ..

Dr. Gale Wilson, the autopsy surgeon and chief pathologist for the King County Coroner, testified that the child died because an abscessed tooth had been allowed to develop into an infection of the mouth and cheeks, eventually
becoming gangrenous. . . . Dr. Wilson testified that in his opinion the infection had lasted for approximately 2 weeks, and that the odor generally associated with gangrene would have been present for approximately 10 days before death. He also
expressed the opinion that had medical care been first obtained in the last week before the baby's death, such care would have been obtained too late to have saved the baby’s life. Accordingly, the baby’s apparent condition between September
1 and September 5, 1968 became the critical period for the purpose of determining whether in the exercise of ordinary caution defendants should have provided medical care for the minor child.

The testimony concerning the child's apparent condition during the critical period is not crystal clear, but is sufficient to warrant the following statement of the matter. The defendant husband testified that he noticed the baby was sick
about 2 weeks before the baby died. The defendant wife testified that she noticed the baby was ill about a week and a half or 2 weeks before the baby died. The evidence showed that in the critical period the baby was fussy; that he could not keep
his food down; and that a cheek started swelling up. The swelling went up and down, but did not disappear. In that same period, the cheek turned “a bluish color like.”

p.5t6

p.si7
The defendants, not realizing that the baby was as ill as it was or that the baby was in danger of dying, attempted to provide some relief to the baby by giving the baby aspirin during the critical period and continued to do so until the night before
the baby died. The defendants thought the swelling would go down and were waiting for it to do so; and defendant husband testified, that from what he had heard, neither doctors nor dentists pull out a tooth “when it’s all swollen up like that.”
There was an additional explanation for not calling a doctor given by each defendant. Defendant husband testified that “the way the cheek looked, . . . and that stuff on his hair, they would think we were neglecting him and take him away from
us and not give him back.” Defendant wife testified that the defendants were “waiting for the swelling to go down,” and also that they were afraid to take the child to a doctor for fear that the doctor would report them to the welfare department,
who, in turn, would take the child away. “It’s just that | was so scared of losing him.” They testified that they had heard that the defendant husband's cousin lost a child that way. The evidence showed that the defendants did not understand the
significance or seriousness of the baby's symptoms. However, there is no evidence that the defendants were physically or financially unable to obtain a doctor, or that they did not know an available doctor, or that the symptoms did not continue
to be a matter of concern during the critical period. Indeed, the evidence shows that in April 1968 defendant husband had taken the child to a doctor for medical attention.

In our opinion, there is sufficient evidence from which the court could find, as it necessarily did, that applying the standard of ordinary caution, i.e., the caution exercisable by a man of reasonable prudence under the same or similar
conditions, defendants were sufficiently put on notice concerning the symptoms of the baby's illness and lack of improvement in the baby's apparent condition in the period from September 1 to September 5, 1968 to have required them to have
obtained medical care for the child. The failure so to do in this case is ordinary or simple negligence, and such negligence is sufficient to support a conviction of statutory manslaughter.

The judgment is affirmed.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Child custody and intervention in Native American families. The defendants’ “fear that the Welfare Department would take the baby away from them” was by no means unusual among Native American families in the 1960s
and 1970s. For a variety of reasons, child welfare agencies often were quick to assume that “the best interests of the child” were served by removing Native American children to other homes, and the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs sometimes
paid states to take Native American children from their families in order to place them in other homes or with religious groups. At one point, up to 25 to 35 percent of all Native American children were being removed from their families and placed
elsewhere. In the late 1970s congressional hearings found convincing evidence of precipitous intervention and other abuses that threatened the welfare of individual children and the long-term survival of Native American culture.12 In 1978 — well

p.si7

p51
after the facts that gave rise to the Williams case — Congress responded by enacting the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. §§1901 et seq., which aimed to reverse that dynamic by giving tribal governments primary authority over child custody
proceedings involving Native American children.

2. Assessing the facts of Williams under the criminal-negligence standard. The manslaughter statutes involved in Williams were repealed in 1975. The current statutes create two degrees of manslaughter: recklessly causing
death and causing death by criminal negligence. See Wash. Rev. Code §§9A.32.060, 9A.32.070 (2021). In accord with generally prevailing law in other states, Washington no longer imposes manslaughter liability in cases involving ordinary negli-
gence. See State v. Norman, 808 P.2d 1159, 1162 (Wash. Ct. App. 1991).

QUESTIONS: Would the Williams court have reached a different result under the criminal negligence requirement in effect today? Or, on the court's view of the facts, was the couple’s departure from ordinary standards of care so substantial that
it would qualify as criminal negligence?

3. Explaining Williams. Despite these changes in the legal framework under which the Williams case arose, the issues it presents remain with us. Many will find the conviction of the Williams couple unjust and, perhaps, pointless.
Why were the defendants punished?

(a) Note that the court calls attention to the race of the defendants. In what respect, if any, did their race have a bearing on the issues in the case?

(b) Were the defendants punished only because of their lack of knowledge and limited education? If so, can they be blamed for their lack of awareness? See Peter Westen, Individualizing the Reasonable Person in Criminal Law, 2 Crim.
L. & Phil. 137, 154 (2008). If blame is inappropriate under these circumstances, does it follow that punishment for negligence (where there is no awareness of the risk) is always unjust?

(c) Alternatively, was the Williams couple punished because they were aware of the danger and chose not to seek help, out of fear that the Welfare Department would take the baby away from them? If so, should this be viewed as a
case of unjustifiably “taking the law into their own hands”? Or was it a justified response to their perception that state authorities were too quick to charge members of their community with child neglect? For a perceptive analysis of this aspect of
Williams, see Samuel H. Pillsbury, Judging Evil 181-184 (1998); Megan H. Dearth, Defending the “Indefensible”: Replacing Ethnocentrism with a Native American Cultural Defense, 35 Am. Indian L. Rev. 621 (2011).

4. In thinking about the preceding questions, consider the materials in the Notes that follow.

NOTES ON THE OBJECTIVE STANDARD.

1, Support for punishment in the absence of subjective awareness. (a) Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr. defended an objective standard in Commonwealth v. Pierce, 138 Mass. 165 (1884). Pierce, a physician, had been convicted

of manslaughter on evidence that
pst
p.519

being called to attend a sick woman, [he] caused her, with her consent, to be kept in flannels saturated with kerosene for three days, more or less, by reason of which she died. There was evidence that he had made similar
applications with favorable results in other cases, but that in one the effect had been to blister and burn the flesh as in the present case.
The trial court had refused to instruct the jury that a finding of recklessness was required for conviction. Justice Holmes formulated the issue as follows (id. at 175-176):
[Rlecklessness in a moral sense means a certain state of consciousness with reference to the consequences of one’s acts. No matter whether defined as indifference to what those consequences may be, or as a failure to
consider their nature or probability as fully as the party might and ought to have done, it is understood to depend on the actual condition of the individual's mind with regard to consequences, as distinguished from mere
knowledge of present or past facts or circumstances from which some one or everybody else might be led to anticipate or apprehend them if the supposed act were done. We have to determine whether recklessness in this
sense was necessary to make the defendant guilty of felonious homicide, or whether his acts are to be judged by the external standard of what would be morally reckless, under the circumstances known to him, in a man of
reasonable prudence. More specifically, the questions . . . are whether an actual good intent and the expectation of good results are an absolute justification of acts, however foolhardy they may be if judged by the external
standard supposed, and whether the defendant's ignorance of the tendencies of kerosene administered as it was will excuse the administration of it.
After reviewing the objective standards applicable in civil cases, Holmes concluded:
If this is the rule adopted in regard to the redistribution of losses, which sound policy allows to rest where they fall in the absence of a clear reason to the contrary, there would seem to be at least equal reason for adopting it
in the criminal law, which has for its immediate object and task to establish a general standard, or at least general negative limits, of conduct for the community, in the interest of the safety of all.
(b) Justice Holmes justifies punishment for inadvertent negligence on the basis of its assumed public safety benefits, but is such punishment fair? Consider Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.02 at 243-244 (1980),
which states:
When people have knowledge that conviction and sentence, not to speak of punishment, may follow conduct that inadvertently creates improper risk, they are supplied with an additional motive to take care before acting, to
use their faculties and draw on their experience in gauging the
p.519
p.520
potentialities of contemplated conduct. To some extent, at least, this motive may promote awareness and thus be effective as a measure of control. Moreover, moral defect can properly be imputed to instances where the
defendant acts out of insensitivity to the interests of other people, and not merely out of an intellectual failure to grasp them.
(c) Samuel H. Pillsbury, Crimes of Indifference, 49 Rutgers L. Rev. 105, 106, 150-151 (1996):
The key to culpability for failure to perceive is why the person failed to perceive. Assume two cases in which a driver runs a red light and fatally injures a pedestrian in the cross-walk. One case involves a father rushing his
severely injured child to the hospital. Another involves a teenager showing off for his friends. Assume that in both cases the driver saw neither the light nor the pedestrian. Culpability should depend on the drivers’ reasons
for perceptive failure, not on the failure itself. The father's lack of perception may be attributed to his overriding and morally worthy desire to help his child. . . . The teenager placed a higher value on winning the admiration of
friends than on attending to the risks of fast driving. [His] conduct demonstrates an attitude of indifference toward others, a morally culpable state to which society should forcefully respond by conviction and punishment. . ..
Individuals deserve punishment for all acts displaying serious disregard for the moral worth of other human beings. Such acts involve many different levels of awareness. . . . In all cases we should judge the ac-
tor's choices: what she has chosen to care about and perceive, and what she has chosen not to care about and perceive. These choices give the individual's conduct a distinct moral meaning.

2. Criticism of the objective standard. (a) Larry Alexander & Kimberly Kessler Ferzan, Crime and Culpability 71 (2009):

We are not morally culpable for taking risks of which we are unaware. At any point in time we are failing to notice a great many things. . . An injunction to notice, remember, and be fully informed about anything that bears on

risks to others is an injunction no human being can comply with, so violating this injunction reflects no moral defect. Even those most concered with the well-being of others will violate this injunction constantly.

(b) Glanville Williams, Criminal Law: The General Part 122-123 (2d ed. 1961):

With the best will in the world, we all of us at some times in our lives make negligent mistakes. It is hard to see how justice (as distinct from some utilitarian reason) requires mistakes to be punished.

[The deterrent theory . . . finds itself in some difficulty when applied to negligence. At best the deterrent effect of the legal sanction is a matter of faith rather than of proved scientific fact; but there is no depart-
ment in which this faith is less firmly grounded than that of negligence. Hardly any motorist but does not firmly believe that if he is involved in an accident it
p.520
ps2

will be the other fellow’s fault. It may seem, therefore, that the threat of punishment for negligence must pass him by, because he does not realize that it is addressed to him. Even if a person admits that he occasionally

makes a negligent mistake, how, in the nature of things, can punishment for inadvertence serve to deter?

3. Individualizing the objective standard. Professor H.L.A. Hart argued that the problem with the so-called objective approach is not that it sets an objective standard, but that the standard is applied without regard to the ability of
the defendant to comply with it. He notes a crucial difference between objective standards that are “invariant” and those that are “individualized” (Punishment and Responsibility 153-154 (1968)):

The expression “objective” and its partner “subjective” are unhappy because, as far as negligence is concerned, they obscure the real issue. . . . For, when negligence is made criminally punishable, this itself
leaves open the question: whether, before we punish, both or only the first of the following two questions must be answered affirmatively:
(i) Did the accused fail to take those precautions which any reasonable man with normal capacities would in the circumstances have taken?
(i) Could the accused, given his mental and physical capacities, have taken those precautions?

. .. It may well be that, even if the “standard of care” is pitched very low so that individuals are held liable only if they fail to take very elementary precautions against harm, there will still be some unfortunate individuals who,

through lack of intelligence, powers of concentration or memory, or through clumsiness, could not attain even this low standard. If our conditions of liability are invariant and not flexible, i.e., if they are not adjusted to the

capacities of the accused, then some individuals will be held liable for negligence though they could not have helped their failure to comply with the standard. In such cases, indeed, criminal responsibility will be made inde-

pendent of any “subjective element,” since the accused could not have conformed to the required standard. But this result [has] nothing to do with negligence being taken as a basis for criminal liability. . . . “Absolute liability”

results, not from the admission of the principle that one who has been grossly negligent is criminally responsible for the consequent harm even if “he had no idea in his mind of harm to anyone,” but from the refusal in the ap-

plication of this principle to consider the capacities of an individual who has fallen below the standard of care.

German law adopts an approach similar to Hart's. As expressed in a leading case, The Case of the Gable-Wall (Giebelmauer), 56 RGSt 343, 349 (1922), “A harm caused by defendants can be said to be caused by negligence only when
it is established that they disregarded the care which they were obliged to exercise and of which they were capable under the circumstances and according to their personal knowledge and abilities. . ..” For discussion of this approach, see Tatjana
Hoernle, Social Expectations in the Criminal Law: The “Reasonable Person” in a Comparative Perspective, 11 New Crim. L. Rev. 1 (2008).

ps2

p.822
QUESTIONS: This approach would seem to make legal guilt and moral blameworthiness more nearly the same, but is it workable? How could we know whether a defendant lacked the capacity to be aware of a danger, except in cases of demon-
strable mental abnormality? And must the incapacity be total, or is it sufficient that a defendant's capacity is limited? If the latter, then how limited? Consider the Williams couple. Were they unable to realize the degree of danger? Consider these
questions again when we examine the defense of diminished capacity, p. 982 infra.
4, The MPC on individualization. The MPC definition of negligence rejects a fully individualized standard. However, some degree of individualization is invited by its reference to “the care that would be exercised by a reasonable
person in [the actor's] situation.” (Italics added). Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §2.02 at 242 (1985) states:
There is an inevitable ambiguity in “situation.” If the actor were blind or if he had just suffered a blow or experienced a heart attack, these would certainly be facts to be considered in a judgment involving criminal liability, as
they would be under traditional law. But the heredity, intelligence or temperament of the actor would not be held material in judging negligence, and could not be without depriving the criterion of all its objectivity. The Code
is not intended to displace discriminations of this kind, but rather to leave the issue to the courts.
Recall that the MPC took a similar approach in its test for provocation, where the objectivity of the standard is qualified by the sentence (§210.3): “The reasonableness of such explanation or excuse shall be determined from the view-
point of a person in the actor’s situation under the circumstances as he believes them to be.” (Italics added.)
QUESTION: How would the Williams case be decided under the Code?
5. The case law on individualization. Although the MPC leaves to the courts the problem of determining the appropriate degree of individualization, the courts remain ambivalent or in conflict. In State v. Everhart, 231 S.E.2d 604
(N.C. 1977), the defendant, a young girl with an IQ of 72, gave birth in her own bedroom and, thinking that the baby had been born dead, wrapped it from head to foot in a blanket. The baby smothered to death. The court reversed a conviction
for involuntary manslaughter, holding that because of the defendant's low IQ and the admittedly accidental nature of the death, the state had not proved culpable negligence. Compare State v. Patterson, 27 A.3d 374 (Conn. App. Ct. 2011). The
defendant withheld water from a two-year-old boy in her care in order to prevent him from wetting his bed. After four days of this mistreatment, the child stopped breathing and died as a result of severe dehydration. The defense argued that the
defendant, who had an IQ of 61 (placing her in the bottom one-half of 1 percent of the population), “was cognitively unable to perceive the risks created by her actions.” The appellate court nonetheless upheld her conviction for criminally negligent
homicide, stating that “[elven if... . the defendant was incapable of perceiving the risk of death . . ., we cannot consider the defendant's diminished mental capacity in the context of criminally negligent homicide because we employ an objective
standard.”
p.822
p.528
QUESTION: What purpose (retributive, utilitarian, or otherwise) does conviction serve in such a case?
PROBLEM
In Walker v. Superior Court, 763 P.2d 852 (Cal. 1988), the defendant's four-year-old daughter fell ill with flu-like symptoms and later developed a stiff neck. The defendant, a member of the Church of Christ, Scientist, elected to treat her
daughter with prayer rather than medicine, even though healthcare decisions are not dictated by the church or its theology." The defendant sought prayerful support from a Christian Science practitioner and together they supervised the child’s
treatment. Over a 17-day period, the child's condition worsened. She lost weight, grew disoriented, and eventually died of meningitis.
QUESTIONS: Is the mother guilty of involuntary manslaughter? Are the arguments for conviction stronger or weaker than those in the Williams case?

Reconciling respect for religious belief with the imperative to protect children presents a complex legal challenge. Advocacy groups estimate that in the past 25 years, roughly 300 children have died after medical care was withheld by
members of various religious groups on a variety of religious grounds.12 Under current law, the First Amendment right to free exercise of religion affords no constitutional defense to a prosecution for child endangerment or involuntary manslaugh-
ter in such circumstances, 3 but many states grant a statutory defense in cases of this kind. That exemption typically is inapplicable when the child's condition is life-threatening. See State v. Neumann, 832 N.W.2d 560 (Wis. 2013). Nonetheless,
several courts have barred prosecution in cases involving fatal outcomes, on the ground that the state's “spiritual treatment accommodation” statute was too vague to give parents adequate notice of the point at which their conduct became cul-
pably negligent. See Hermanson v. State, 604 So. 2d 775 (Fla. 1992); State v. McKown, 475 N.W.2d 63 (Minn. 1991).

In the Walker case, how should the mother’s religious beliefs affect the analysis of whether her conduct was criminally negligent? Should her religious beliefs

p.828
p.524
count among the justifications to be weighed against the degree of the risk? Is the mother’s religion part of her “situation,” so that the proper standard would be to consider the actions expected of a reasonable member of her church? Is it relevant
that the Christian Science Church, as the court in Walker explained, does not insist that followers rely only on prayer and that the church does not stigmatize adherents who seek medical treatment?1 If courts take religion into account, do they
need to become well versed in what is and is not allowed by a particular faith? In Walker, the court sustained the manslaughter indictment, holding (763 P.2d at 868) that “criminal negligence must be evaluated objectively” and that the controlling
question was whether “a reasonable person in defendant's position would have been aware of the risk involved.” Is this the proper approach under the MPC? For discussion, see Edward Smith, Note, The Criminalization of Belief: When Free Exer-
cise Isn't, 42 Hastings L.J. 1491 (1991).
¢. Distinguishing Murder from Manslaughter
Commonwealth v. Malone
‘Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
47 A.2d 445 (Pa. 1946)

Maxey, C.J. This is an appeal from the judgment and sentence under a conviction of murder in the second degree. William H. Long, age 13 years, was killed by a shot from a 32-caliber revolver held against his right side by the de-
fendant, then aged 17 years. These youths were on friendly terms at the time of the homicide. The defendant and his mother while his father and brother were in the U.S. Armed Forces, were residing in Lancaster, Pa., with the family of William H.
Long, whose son was the victim of the shooting.

On the evening of February 26th, 1945, when the defendant went to a moving picture theater, he carried in the pocket of his raincoat a revolver which he had obtained at the home of his uncle on the preceding day. In the afternoon
preceding the shooting, the decedent procured a cartridge from his father’s room and he and the defendant placed it in the revolver.

After leaving the theater, the defendant went to a dairy store and there met the decedent. Both youths sat in the rear of the store ten minutes, during which period the defendant took the gun out of his pocket and loaded the chamber to

524

p. 526
the right of the firing pin and then closed the gun. A few minutes later, both youths sat on stools in front of the lunch counter and ate some food. The defendant suggested to the decedent that they play “Russian Poker.”! Long replied, “I don’t care;
go ahead.” The defendant then placed the revolver against the right side of Long and pulled the trigger three times. The third pull resulted in a fatal wound to Long. The latter jumped off the stool and cried: “Oh! Oh! Oh!” and Malone said: “Did | hit
you, Billy? Gee, Kid, I'm sorry.” Long died from the wounds two days later.

The defendant testified that the gun chamber he loaded was the first one to the right of the firing chamber and that when he pulled the trigger he did not “expect to have the gun go off.” He declared he had no intention of harming Long,
who was his friend and companion. The defendant was indicted for murder, tried and found guilty of murder in the second degree and sentenced to a term in the penitentiary for a period not less than five years and not exceeding ten years. A new
trial was refused and after sentence was imposed, an appeal was taken.

Appellant . . . contends that the facts did not justify a conviction for any form of homicide except involuntary manslaughter. This contention we overrule. A specific intent to take life is, under our law, an essential ingredient of murder in
the first degree. At common law, the “grand criterion” which “distinguished murder from other killing” was malice on the part of the killer and this malice was not necessarily “malevolent to the deceased particularly” but “any evil design in general;
the dictate of a wicked, depraved and malignant heart”; 4 Blackstone 199. . . .

When an individual commits an act of gross recklessness for which he must reasonably anticipate that death to another is likely to result, he exhibits that “wickedness of disposition, hardness of heart, cruelty, recklessness of conse-
quences, and a mind regardless of social duty” which proved that there was at that time in him “the state or frame of mind termed malice.” This court has declared that if a driver “wantonly, recklessly, and in disregard of consequences” hurls “his
car against another, or into a crowd” and death results from that act “he ought . . . to face the same consequences that would be meted out to him if he had accomplished death by wantonly and wickedly firing a gun”: Com. v. Mayberry, 290 Pa.
195, 199, 138 A. 686, 688, citing cases from four jurisdictions. . . .

The killing of William H. Long by this defendant resulted from an act intentionally done by the latter, in reckless and wanton disregard of the consequences which were at least sixty percent certain from his thrice attempted discharge
of a gun known to contain one bullet and aimed at a vital part of Long's body. This killing was, therefore, murder, for malice in the sense of a wicked disposition is evidenced by the intentional doing of an uncalled-for act in callous disregard of its
likely harmful effects on others. The fact that there was no motive for this homicide does not exculpate the accused. In a trial for murder proof of motive is always relevant but never necessary. All the assignments of error are overruled and the judg-
ment is affirmed.

p. 526
p.526
NOTES

1. The facts in Malone. In concluding that there was a 60 percent chance of the gun's discharging, the court apparently assumed that the defendant twirled the revolver’s cylinder before each of the three times that he pulled the trigger
(see footnote 1 of the opinion). Because it was a five-chambered gun, the chances were three out of five that one of those shots would fire the bullet. But suppose the gun had discharged on the first pull, when the chance of that happening would
have been only one out of five? Would the defendant still be guilty of murder?

The court's assumption was contrary to the implication of the defendant's testimony that he loaded the chamber to the right of the firing pin and fired without spinning the cylinder, in which case he would know which chamber
contained the bullet. If, in fact, the defendant did just what he testified he did — loaded the chamber to the right of the firing pin and then fired without twirling the chamber — how is it that the gun discharged? The gun may have misfired in some
fashion. Or conceivably there was more than one bullet in the gun. (Recall the testimony about how the gun was handled during the afternoon preceding the shooting, If the court had accepted the defendant's version of the facts, would the result
have been different? Malone was sentenced to five-to-ten years. Is that an appropriate punishment on either set of facts?

2. Definitions of unintentional murder. Common-law formulations of the circumstances under which an unintentional killing constituted murder rather than manslaughter have been incorporated into many American statutes either
directly or by reference to such common-law terms as “malice.” The formulas have tended to rely primarily on colorful epithets — “the dictate of a wicked, depraved and malignant heart”; or “an abandoned and malignant heart.” The Malone case
is an example of circumstances in which the criteria have been held satisfied. Other classic examples are throwing a heavy object down upon a busy street, shooting into an occupied building, and beating a person so severely that the person is
unintentionally killed. Some states have tried to give these terms an interpretation more meaningful to juries. For example, in People v. Dellinger, 783 P.2d 200, 201 (Cal. 1989), the court defined malice to be implied “when the killing results from an
intentional act, . .. which act was deliberately performed by a person who knows that his conduct endangers the life of another and who acts with conscious disregard for life.”

Many state statutes now use formulas inspired by the MPC: Unintended killing is murder when committed recklessly (as defined in §2.02(2)(c)) and “under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human
life” (§210.2). The Commentary explains (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.2 at 21-22 (1980)):

[The first] judgment must be made in terms of whether the actor's conscious disregard of the risk, given the circumstances of the case, so far departs from acceptable behavior that it constitutes a “gross deviation from the
standard of conduct that a law-abiding person would observe in the actor's situation.” Ordinary recklessness in this sense is made sufficient for a conviction of manslaughter under Section 210.3(1)(a). Ina
p.526
p.827
prosecution for murder, however, the Code calls for the further judgment whether the actor's conscious disregard . . . manifests extreme indifference to the value of human life. The significance of purpose or knowledge as

astandard of culpability is that, cases of provocation or other mitigation apart, purposeful or knowing homicide demonstrates precisely such indifference to the value of human life. Whether recklessness is so extreme that it

demonstrates similar indifference is not a question . . . that can be further clarified. It must be left directly to the trier of fact under instructions which make it clear that recklessness that can fairly be assimilated to purpose or

knowledge should be treated as murder and that less extreme recklessness should be punished as manslaughter.
Insofar as Subsection (1)(b) includes within the murder category cases of homicide caused by extreme recklessness, though without purpose to kill, it reflects both the common law and much pre-existing statu-

tory treatment usually cast in terms of conduct evidencing a “depraved heart regardless of human life” or some similar words.

3. Distinguishing manslaughter from unintentional murder. The common law and statutes derived from it distinguished between manslaughter and unintentional murder based on how wicked and depraved the killing seemed to
be. That approach, of course, remits the issue to subjective judgment calls of the judge or jury. The MPC formula, requiring recklessness “in circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life” omits the vituperative com-
mon-law language, but does it make the calll less subjective? For careful analysis of possible solutions, see Eric A. Johnson, Knowledge, Risk, and Wrongdoing: The Model Penal Code's Forgotten Answer to the Riddle of Objective Probability, 59
Buff. L. Rev. 507 (2011), Alan C. Michaels, Defining Unintended Murder, 85 Colum. L. Rev. 786 (1985); Kyron Huigens, Homicide in Aretaic Terms, 6 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 97 (2002).

Courts applying the MPC approach have had a hard time with these issues. The New York murder statute roughly follows the MPC language, only substituting “depraved indifference” for “extreme indifference.” The New York Court of
Appeals has held that “depraved indifference” requires a finding of “utter depravity, uncommon brutality and inhuman cruelty.” People v. Taylor, 939 N.E.2d 1206, 1209 (N.Y. 2010). Consider how this standard should be applied to these cases:

(a) In Taylor, supra, after T and his neighbor N had smoked crack together, N attacked him, and T hit her on the head to defend himself. Later, he covered N’s head with a knotted plastic bag (allegedly to stop her blood from spreading)
and carried her to the roof of his building, where she was found dead the next morning. The court of appeals, stressing that “the People did not establish ‘torture or a brutal, prolonged’ course of conduct,” held that the evidence was insufficient to
establish the depravity required for murder rather than manslaughter. Id. Do you agree?

(b) In People v. Prindle, 944 N.E.2d 1130 (N.Y. 2011), P, after stealing a snowplow blade, led pursuing police officers on a high-speed chase through the streets of Rochester, New York, running five red lights and repeatedly driving into
the lanes of oncoming traffic before colliding with another vehicle and killing its driver. Dividing 4-3, the court set aside a conviction for depraved indifference murder,

p.827

p.828
finding the evidence sufficient only to establish reckless manslaughter. The dissenting judges insisted that P's conduct was “so devoid of regard of the live or lives of others . . . as to render defendant as culpable as one whose conscious objective
was to kill.” Id. at 1134.

4, Murder by omission. We have seen that the death of an infant through its parents’ neglect may constitute manslaughter. State v. Williams, p. 515 supra. Can such neglect rise to the level of murder? A California court upheld a
second-degree murder conviction of a father for calllous failure to feed his child, resulting in death through malnutrition and dehydration. The evidence showed that during the last two weeks of the baby’s life, the father was aware that it was starv-
ing to death, that he did not remember anyone's having fed the baby in that period, and that he himself did not, because he “just didn’t care.” The court stated: “The omission of a duty is in law the equivalent of an act and when death results, the
standard for determination of the degree of homicide is identical.” People v. Burden, 140 Cal. Rptr. 282, 289 (Ct. App. 1977).

United States v. Fleming

United States Court of Appeals, Fourth Circuit
739 F.2d 945 (1984)

Winter, C.J.: [Defendant was convicted of second-degree murder in the death of Margaret Haley. At about 3:00 p.m., he was driving southbound on the George Washington Memorial Parkway, a park within federal jurisdiction, at speeds
between 70 and 100 miles per hour, in zones where the speed limit was 45 m.p.h. Several times he drove into the northbound lanes in order to avoid traffic congestion in the southbound lanes. Northbound traffic had to move out of his way in order
to avoid a head-on collision. Approximately six miles from where his car was first observed traveling at excessive speed, he lost control and struck the car driven by Mrs. Haley that was coming in the opposite direction. His car was estimated to be
traveling 70 to 80 m.p.h. at the moment of impact, in a zone where the speed limit was 30 m.p.h. Mrs. Haley was severely injured and died at the scene]

Fleming was pulled from the wreckage of his car and transported to [a] hospital for treatment. His blood alcohol level was there tested at .315 percent. [He] was indicted by a grand jury on a charge of second-degree murder, . . . tried
before a jury and convicted.

Defendant . . . contends that the facts are inadequate to establish . . . malice aforethought, and thus that he should have been convicted of manslaughter at most.

Malice aforethought, as provided in 18 U.S.C. §1111(a),2 is the distinguishing characteristic which, when present, makes a homicide murder rather than manslaughter. . . . [Malice] may be established by evidence of conduct which is
“reckless

p.828

p.529
and wanton and a gross deviation from a reasonable standard of care, of such a nature that a jury is warranted in inferring that defendant was aware of a serious risk of death or serious bodily harm.” To support a conviction for murder, the govern-
ment need only have proved that defendant intended to operate his car in the manner in which he did with a heart that was without regard for the life and safety of others.2

We conclude that the evidence regarding defendant's conduct was adequate to sustain a finding by the jury that defendant acted with malice aforethought. . .

The difference between malice, which will support conviction for murder, and gross negligence, which will permit of conviction only for manslaughter, is one of degree rather than kind. In the present case, . . . the facts show a deviation
from established standards of regard for life and the safety of others that is markedly different in degree from that found in most vehicular homicides. In the average drunk driving homicide, there is no proof that the driver has acted while intox-
icated with the purpose of wantonly and intentionally putting the lives of others in danger. Rather, his driving abilities were so impaired that he recklessly put others in danger simply by being on the road and attempting to do the things that any
driver would do. In the present case, however, . . . defendant drove in a manner that could be taken to indicate depraved disregard of human life, particularly in light of the fact that because he was drunk his reckless behavior was all the more
dangerous. . ..

Affirmed.

NOTES AND QUESTIONS

1. Murder by drunk driving. In accord with Fleming, most American courts hold that egregiously dangerous driving can support a conviction of murder. See Dora W. Klein, Is Felony Murder the New Depraved Heart Murder? Con-
sidering the Appropriate Punishment for Drunken Drivers Who Kill, 67 S.C. L. Rev. 1 (2015-2016). Usually the theory is that the defendant had an actual awareness of a great risk of fatal harm. See, ¢.g., Jeffries v. State, 169 P.3d 913 (Alaska 2007),
in which the court upheld a second-degree murder conviction where the defendant, who had a blood-alcohol level of 0.27 (more than three times the ordinary limit) drove his car directly in front of an oncoming vehicle on a well-lit, icy street. The
court found that “Jeffries’s prior convictions for drunk driving, court orders to attend substance abuse programs, and a condition of probation that he abstain from drinking alcohol permitted a finding that he had a heightened awareness that driv-
ing while

p.529

p.530
grossly intoxicated was highly dangerous,” id. at 914, and thus his actions were not merely inadvertent.

Compare People v. Watson, 637 P.2d 279 (Cal. 1981), where again a drunk driver was convicted of murder. The court found sufficient evidence of awareness of the danger merely because the defendant “had driven his car to the estab-
lishment where he had been drinking, and he must have known that he would have to drive it later. It also may be presumed that defendant was aware of the hazards of driving while intoxicated.” Id. at 285-286. A dissent observed (id. at 288):

The act of speeding through a green light at 55 or 60 miles per hour in a 35-mile-per-hour zone was dangerous, but was not an act likely to result in the death of another. It was 1 o’clock in the morning. The person whose car

respondent nearly collided with testified that he saw no other cars around. . . .

No one holds a brief for this type of activity. However, [death or injury is not the probable result of driving while under the influence of alcohol. “Thousands, perhaps hundreds of thousands, of Californians each

week reach home without accident despite their driving intoxicated.” [T]he majority's reasoning [could] be used to establish second-degree murder in every case in which a person drives a car to a bar, a friend’s home, or a

party, drinks alcohol so that he is under its influence, drives away and is involved in a fatal accident.

QUESTIONS: Nearly everyone knows (is “consciously aware”) that the risks of a serious collision are greater when driving while intoxicated than when driving in the same way while sober. Does that mean that whenever drunk drivers cause a fatal
accident, they should be guilty of murder? If not, is the kind of egregiously bad driving illustrated by Fleming necessary, or does that sort of requirement set the bar too high? See James Jacobs, Drunk Driving: An American Dilemma 87-88 (1989);
Douglas Husak, Is Drunk Driving a Serious Offense?, 23 Phil. & Pub. Aff. 52 (1994).

2. The Model Penal Code and inadvertent murder. Under §210.2(1)(b), murder requires proof that the defendant acted “recklessly under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life.” See Model Penal
Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.2 at 27-28 (1980):

[This] provision makes clear that inadvertent risk creation, however extravagant and unjustified, cannot be punished as murder. . . . This result is consistent with the general conception of the Model Code that serious felony

sanctions should be grounded securely in the subjective culpability of the actor. To the extent that inadvertent risk creation, or negligence, should be recognized as a form of criminal homicide, that question should be faced

separately from the offense of murder. [NJegligent homicide should not be assimilated to the most serious forms of criminal homicide catalogued under the offense of murder.

3. The MPC and intoxication. Despite its emphatic opposition to punishing inadvertent risk creation as murder, the MPC, in §2.08(2) (discussed in footnote 3 of the Fleming case), provides that recklessness need not be shown if the
defendant

p.530

p.531
was unaware of the risk because of voluntary intoxication. As a result, §2.08(2) in practice contradicts the Commentary just quoted, because it makes negligence (in drinking before driving) a sufficient mens rea for murder. Knowledge that drinking
impairs driving ability is widely disseminated, of course. Alll the same, some drivers believe that they can drive safely while drunk. These people are of course negligent, perhaps grossly negligent, but with respect to the risk of killing another person,
are they reckless under the Code’s definition of that term? And even if they are, have they “manifest[ed] extreme indifference to the value of human life”?

Consider State v. Dufield, 549 A.2d 1205 (N.H. 1988). The defendant was convicted of reckless murder of a woman whom he had brutally injured during a drunken sexual orgy. The New Hampshire reckless murder statute used the
same language as the MPC and, like the MPC, also excluded voluntary intoxication as a basis for claiming a lack of awareness. On appeal, the defendant argued that even though his intoxication was immaterial on the issue of recklessness, it was.
relevant to the extreme indifference required for murder. Hence, he argued, the trial court erred in refusing to recognize his defense. Justice David Souter, then a state judge writing for the New Hampshire Supreme Court, outlined the issues of
statutory interpretation (id. at 1206-1207):

If, on the one hand, proof of “circumstances manifesting extreme indifference” required evidence from which a finder of fact would be able to infer a subjective state of indifference, . . . then the defendant might plausibly

argue that voluntary intoxication would be relevant to proof of that mental state. On this view, “indifference” would be regarded as an element of an offense comparable to a knowing or purposeful state of mind, which must

be shown to have occurred with specific reference to the times and facts to which it relates.

On the other hand, it could be that the function of proving the existence of “circumstances manifesting extreme indifference” is to establish, not a subjective state of mind, but a degree of divergence from the

norm of acceptable behavior even greater than the “gross deviation” from the law-abiding norm, by which reckless conduct is defined. On this view, the words in question would describe a way of objectively measuring such

a deviation, in which case any voluntary intoxication that might have blinded a defendant to the risks of such extreme deviant behavior would be [irrelevant].

The court chose the latter interpretation and affirmed the conviction. Do you agree? Is the holding consistent with the rationale of the “extreme indifference” requirement, as explained in the MPC Commentary, p. 530 supra?

4, Intent to inflict great bodily harm. Evidence that defendants intended to inflict serious injury obviously provides some indication that they recklessly created a risk of death. But the common law went further, by giving such facts
independent substantive significance; the malice required for murder was established by the defendant's intent to inflict great bodily harm. This intent-to-inflict-grievous-harm formula is followed in many American jurisdictions. See Wayne R.
LaFave, Criminal Law 737 (4th ed. 2003). In some states, the doctrine survives as a consequence of statutes retaining the common-law definition of murder (that is, a killing with

p.531
p. 532
“malice aforethought’). In a few states, homicide statutes adopt the “great bodily harm” formula explicitly, for example, 720 Ill. Comp. Stat. Ann. 5/9-1(a) (2021); N.M. Stat. Ann. §30-2-1(B) (2021).

Why treat intent to inflict grievous harm as independently sufficient to support a murder conviction when death results? The MPC omitted the doctrine on the ground that recklessness manifesting extreme indifference to the value of
human life captures all the nonintentional homicides that should be elevated to murder. Comment to §210.2 at 28 (1980). Does it?

2. The Felony-Murder Rule

a. The Basic Doctrine
Regina v. Serné

Central Criminal Court

16 Cox Crim. Cas. 311 (1887)

The prisoners Leon Serné and John Henry Goldfinch were indicted for the murder of a boy, Sjaak Serné, the son of the prisoner Leon Serné, it being alleged that they wilfully set on fire a house and shop, No. 274 Strand, London, by
which act the death of the boy had been caused.

It appeared that the prisoner Serné with his wife, two daughters, and two sons were living at the house in question; and that Serné, at the time he was living there, in Midsummer, 1887, was in a state of pecuniary embarrassment, and
had put into the premises furniture and other goods of but very little value, which at the time of the fire were not of greater value than £30. It also appeared that previously to the fire the prisoner Serné had insured the life of the boy Sjaak Serné, who
was imbecile, and on the first day of September, 1887, had insured his stock at 274 Strand, for £500, his furniture for £100, and his rent for another £100; and that on the 17th of the same month the premises were burnt down.

Evidence was given on behalf of the prosecution that fires were seen breaking out in several parts of the premises at the same time, soon after the prisoners had been seen in the shop together, two fires being in the lower part of the
house and two above, on the floor whence escape could be made on the roof of the adjoining house, and in which part were the prisoners, and the wife, and two daughters of Serné, who escaped. That on the premises were a quantity of tissue

transparencies for advertising purposes, which were of a most inflammable character; and that on the site of one of the fires was found a great quantity of these transparencies close to other inflammable materials. That the prisoner Serné, his wife
and daughters, were rescued from the roof of the adjoining house, the other prisoner being rescued from a window in the front of the house, but that the boys were burnt to death, the body of the one being found on the floor near the window from
which the prisoner Serné, his wife, and daughters had escaped, the body of the other being found at the basement of the premises.

STEPHEN, J. Gentlemen, it is now my duty to direct your attention to the law and the facts into which you have to inquire. The two prisoners are indicted for the

p. 532

1.533
wilful murder of the boy Sjaak Serné, a lad of about fourteen years of age; . .. The definition of murder is unlawful homicide with malice aforethought, and the words malice aforethought are technical. You must not, therefore, construe them or
suppose that they can be construed by ordinary rules of language. The words have to be construed according to a long series of decided cases, which have given them meanings different from those which might be supposed. One of those mean-
ings is, the killing of another person by an act done with an intent to commit a felony. Another meaning is, an act done with the knowledge that the act will probably cause the death of some person. Now it is such an act as the last which is alleged
to have been done in this case; and if you think that either or both of these men in the dock killed this boy, either by an act done with intent to commit a felony, that is to say, the setting of the house on fire in order to cheat the insurance company,
or by conduct which to their knowledge was likely to cause death and was therefore eminently dangerous in itself — in either of these cases the prisoners are guilty of wilful murder in the plain meaning of the word.

| will say a word or two upon one part of this definition, because it is capable of being applied very harshly in certain cases, and also because, though I take the law as | find it, | very much doubt whether the definition which I have
given, although it is the common definition, is not somewhat too wide. Now when it is said that murder means killing a man by an act done in the commission of a felony, the mere words cover a case like this, that is to say, a case where a man
gives another a push with an intention of stealing his watch, and the person so pushed, having a weak heart or some other internal disorder, dies. To take another very old illustration, it was said that if a man shot a fowl with intent to steal it and
accidentally killed a man, he was to be accounted guilty of murder, because the act was done in the commission of a felony.? | very much doubt, however, whether that is really the law, or whether the Court for the Consideration of Crown Cases
Reserved would hold it to be so.

The present case, however, is not such as | have cited, nor anything like them. In my opinion the definition of the law which makes it murder to kill by an act done in the commission of a felony might and ought to be narrowed, while that
part of the law under which the Crown in this case claim to have proved a case of murder is maintained. | think that, instead of saying that any act done with intent to commit a felony and which causes death amounts to murder, it would be reason-
able to say that any act known to be dangerous to life and likely in itself to cause death, done for the purpose of committing a felony which causes death, should be murder. As an illustration of this, suppose that a man, intending to commit a rape

p. 539

p. 534
upon a woman, but without the least wish to kill her, squeezed her by the throat to overpower her, and in so doing killed her, that would be murder. | think that every one would say in a case like that, that when a person began doing wicked acts for
his own base purposes, he risked his own life as well as that of others. That kind of crime does not differ in any serious degree from one committed by using a deadly weapon. . . . If a man once begins attacking the human body in such a way, he
must take the consequences if he goes further than he intended when he began. That | take to be the true meaning of the law in the subject.

In the present case, gentlemen, you have a man sleeping in a house with his wife, his two daughters, his two sons, and a servant, and you are asked to believe that this man, with all these people under his protection, deliberately set fire
to the house in three or four different places and thereby burnt two of them to death. It is alleged that he arranged matters in such a way that any person of the most common intelligence must have known perfectly well that he was placing all those
people in deadly risk. It appears to me that if that were really done, it matters very little indeed whether the prisoners hoped the people would escape or whether they did not. If a person chose, for some wicked purpose of his own to sink a boat at
sea, and thereby caused the deaths of the occupants, it matters nothing whether at the time of committing the act he hoped that the people would be picked up by a passing vessel. He is as much guilty of murder if the people are drowned, as if he
had flung every person into the water with his own hand. Therefore, gentlemen, if Serné and Goldfinch set fire to this house when the family were in it, and if the boys were by that act stifled or burnt to death, then the prisoners are as much guilty
of murder as if they had stabbed the children. | will also add, for my own part, that I think, in so saying, the law of England lays down a rule of broad, plain common-sense. . . .

There was a case tried in this court which you will no doubt remember, and which wil illustrate my meaning. [A] man named Barrett was charged with causing the death of several persons by an explosion which was intended to release
‘one or two men from custody; and | am sure that no one can say truly that Barrett was not justly hanged. With regard to the facts in the present case, the very horror of the crime, if crime it was, the abomination of it, is a reason for your taking the
most extreme care in the case, and for not imputing to the prisoners anything which is not clearly proved. God forbid that | should, by what | say, produce on your minds, even in the smallest degree any feeling against the prisoners. You must see,
gentlemen, that the evidence leaves no reasonable doubt upon your minds; but you will fail in the performance of your duty if, being satisfied with the evidence, you do not convict one or both the prisoners of wilful murder, and it is wilful murder of
which they are accused.

[Verdict, not guilty.]

PEOPLE v. STAMP, 2 CAL. APP 3d 203 (1969): [Defendant burglarized the business premises of one Carl Honeyman and robbed him at gunpoint. During the robbery, Honeyman had been led from his office by the elbow and required to lie on the
floor for about ten minutes, until the defendant had fled. Shortly thereafter, Honeyman began suffering chest pains, collapsed, and died of a heart attack. He was described as “an obese 60-year-old man, with a history of heart disease, who was
under a great deal of pressure due to the intensely competitive nature of his business. Additionally, he did not take good care of his heart.” Doctors testified that

p. 534

p. 535
“t]he fright induced by the robbery was too much of a shock to Honeyman’s system.” Defendant's conviction of first-degree murder was upheld. The court stated:] The [felony-murder] doctrine is not limited to those deaths which are foreseeable.
Rather a felon is held strictly liable for all killings committed by him or his accomplices in the course of the felony. As long as the homicide is the direct causal result of the robbery the felony-murder rule applies whether or not the death was a
natural or probable consequence of the robbery. So long as a victim's predisposing physical condition, regardless of its cause, is not the only substantial factor bringing about his death, that condition and the robber’s ignorance of it, in no way de-
stroys the robber's criminal responsibility for the death. So long as life is shortened as a result of the felonious act it does not matter that the victim might have died soon anyway. In this respect, the robber takes his victim as he finds him.
NOTES ON THE SCOPE OF THE FELONY-MURDER RULE

1. Strict liability? Note that the Stamp decision extends murder liability much further than would the felony-murder rule described by Judge Stephen in Serné. Judge Stephen presented a hypothetical very similar to the facts of Stamp:
One man pushes another, intending to steal his watch, and the man who was pushed then dies of a heart attack. Judge Stephen assumed that the felony-murder rule did not apply to purely accidental killings, and that the English courts of his day
therefore would not find felony murder on such facts.

Unlike Judge Stephen, some early English commentators stated that the felony-murder rule did apply in this situation. See p. 534 footnote a, supra. But one examination of the history concludes that in the early common law, every
conviction for felony murder required some culpability with respect to the killing, in addition to the fault involved in committing the accompanying felony. See Guyora Binder, The Origin of American Felony-Murder Rules, 57 Stan. L. Rev. 59 (2004).

In the United States, however, that qualification was lost, and courts adopted a broad, unqualified felony-murder rule, believing that it was part of the English common law at the time of American independence. Thus, the Stamp case
illustrates the view generally accepted in American courts — that the felony-murder rule imposes strict liability for killings that result from the commission of a felony. In other words, neither knowledge nor recklessness nor negligence is required
with respect to the resulting death. E.g., Commonwealth v. Foster, 28 N.E.2d 427, 434-435 (Mass. 2015); People v. Brothers, 186 Cal. Rptr. 3d 98, 103 (Ct. App. 2015).

2. Sentencing consequences. Whatever its reach, the original common-law felony-murder rule seldom made much practical difference, because very few criminal offenses were considered felonies, and all felonies were punishable by
death, even when no victim of the offense had been killed. The principal use of the felony-murder rule was to permit capital punishment when death resulted from an unsuccessful attempt to commit a felony, because as Judge Stephen noted, the
felony-murder rule came into play when a death was caused by “an act done with an intent to commit a felony” (emphasis added). If the intended felony was not successfully committed, the failed attempt that caused death became a capital of-
fense, even though the attempt by itself was only a misdemeanor at common law. See

p. 535
p. 536

Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §210.2 at 30-32 (1980). Today, of course, legislatures have enacted a long list of statutory felonies, many of them nonviolent. And even for the most serious felonies, authorized sanctions gener-
ally are much lower than those applicable to murder. Transposed into the modern context, therefore, the felony-murder rule can produce a dramatic increase in the applicable punishment.

3. The causation requirement. Although the traditional felony-murder rule eliminates the mens rea requirement of murder, it does not dispense with the actus reus and causation requirements. Hence, it must be shown, as in all
murder cases, that the defendant's conduct “caused” a person's death. As we shall see in the material on causation, Chapter 6 infra, a common formulation of this requirement is that (1) “but for” the felony, the death would not have occurred, and
(2) the result must have been foreseeable or the natural and probable consequence of the defendant's action. The idea underlying the second prong of this formula is that the result must be fairly attributable to the defendant's action, not merely a
coincidence.

Consider King v. Commonwealth, 368 S.E.2d 704 (Va. Ct. App. 1988). Defendant King and a copilot were transporting 500 pounds of marijuana in a light plane when they became lost in fog and crashed into a mountainside. King
survived the crash, but the copilot did not, and as a result King was convicted of felony murder. The appellate court reversed, holding that the drug-distribution crime was not the proximate cause of the death. Although the “but for” requirement
was met (the crash would not have occurred but for the commission of the felony), the crash was not a foreseeable result of the felony because it was not made more likely by the fact that the plane's cargo was contraband. The court noted that, in
contrast, a finding of proximate causation might have been possible if the crash had resulted from flying the plane at low altitude to avoid detection.

NOTES ON THE RATIONALE OF THE FELONY-MURDER RULE

We previously examined the doctrine that sometimes permits the mens rea of a lesser offense to substitute for the mens rea of a greater offense. E.g., People v. Olsen, p. 320 supra. That doctrine is now rejected in England and in many
American jurisdictions. Yet precisely the same principle serves as the basis of liability in felony murder. Does it have any greater justification in homicidal offenses than in other crimes? If the law is sound in requiring a particular mens rea to estab-
lish murder, is it, by definition, unsound to require less solely because the actor is guilty of another crime? The offense accompanying the killing has its own punishment. In what sense does that offense also make a crime of an otherwise noncrim-
inal killing or justify more severe punishment for a killing that would otherwise deserve a lower sentence?

Professor Guyora Binder argues (The Culpability of Felony Murder, 83 Notre Dame L. Rev. 965, 967 (2008)) that a person who negligently kills in the course of committing another felony can justifiably be punished for murder, not just
negligent homicide, because “the felon’s additional depraved purpose aggravates his culpability for causing death carelessly.” A related argument is developed in

p. 536
597
Kenneth W. Simons, When Is Strict Criminal Liability Just?, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1075, 1121-1125 (1997):

[Llet us assume [an armed robber] recklessly caused death. So his punishment for felony murder can be at least as severe as the combined punishment that retributive principles permit for the felony and for reckless homi-

cide. But can the punishment be more? | believe that it can, insofar as knowingly creating a risk of death in the context of another criminal act is more culpable behavior than knowingly creating a risk of death in the context

of an innocent or less culpable act. . . .

Now consider a . . . case [where] the foreseeability of death resulting from a particular felony is just below the threshold that we require for negligent homicide. For example, consider an unarmed bank robbery in

which the risk of death (from a guard or police officer) is real but not sufficient to surpass that threshold. Should we conclude that the bank robber has displayed no culpability as to the risk of death . . . 2

[That conclusion would rest] on too narrow a conception of negligence. . . . To express genuine differentials in retributive blame, we should take a more subtle, holistic view of negligence. . . . [T]he unarmed bank
robber . . . can properly be found negligent as to the risk of death even if the foreseeable risk of harm is less than would be required to find him negligent had he been engaged in an innocent or less culpable activity.

In assessing Professor Simons’s argument, note that creating a substantial risk of death may or may not be culpable, depending on whether the risk can be justified. The desire to commit a felony obviously cannot justify taking such a
risk, and as a result, as Professor Simon points out, “the unarmed bank robber . . . can properly be found negligent as to the risk of death.” On that basis the unarmed bank robber presumably could be convicted of negligent homicide or involun-
tary manslaughter. Does the wrongness of the accompanying felony aggravate culpability in some additional way, so that these facts should be considered to convict the defendant of murder?

Consider these further observations concerning the felony-murder rule:

PEOPLE v. WASHINGTON, 402 P. 2d 130, 133 (CAL. 1965): The purpose of the felony-murder rule is to deter felons from killing negligently or accidentally by holding them strictly responsible for killings they commit.

TT.B. MACAULAY, A PENAL CODE PREPARED BY THE INDIAN LAW COMMISSIONERS, NOTE M, 64-65 (1838): It will be admitted that, when an act is in itself innocent, to punish the person who does it because bad consequences which no human
wisdom could have foreseen have followed from it would be in the highest degree barbarous and absurd. [T]o pronounce [that person] guilty of one offence because a misfortune befell him while he was committing another offence . . . is surely to
confound all the boundaries of crime. . . .

[That] is a course which evidently adds nothing to the security of human life. No man can so conduct himself as to make it absolutely certain that he shall not be so unfortunate as to cause the death of a fellow creature. The utmost that

he

p.597

p. 538
can do is to abstain from everything which is at all likely to cause death. No fear of punishment can make him do more than this. . .. The only good effect which such punishment can produce will be to deter people from committing any of those
offences which turn into murders what are in themselves mere accidents. It is in fact an addition to the punishment of those offences, and it is an addition in the very worst way. For example, hundreds of persons in some great cities are in the
habit of picking pockets. They know that they are guilty of a great offence. But it has never occurred to one of them, nor would it occur to any rational man, that they are guilty of an offence which endangers life. Unhappily one of these hundreds
attempts to take the purse of a gentleman who has a loaded pistol in his pocket. The thief touches the trigger: the pistol goes off: the gentleman is shot dead. To treat the case of this pick-pocket differently from that of the numerous pick-pockets
who steal under exactly the same circumstances, with exactly the same intentions, with no less risk of causing death, with no greater care to avoid causing death, — to send them to the house of correction as thieves, and him to the gallows as a
murderer, — appears to us an unreasonable course. If the punishment for stealing from a person be too light, let it be increased, and let the increase fall alike on all the offenders. Surely the worst mode of increasing the punishment of an offence
is to provide that, besides the ordinary punishment, every offender shall run an exceedingly small risk of being hanged. The more nearly the amount of punishment can be reduced to a certainty the better. But if chance is to be admitted there are
better ways of admitting it. It would be a less capricious, and therefore a more salutary course, to provide that every fiftieth or every hundredth thief selected by lot should be hanged, than to provide that every thief should be hanged who, while en-
gaged in stealing, should meet with an unforeseen misfortune such as might have befallen the most virtuous man while performing the most virtuous action.
GEORGE P. FLETCHER, REFLECTIONS ON FELONY-MURDER, 12 SW. U. L. REV. 413, 427 (1981): [One] unrefined mode of thought behind the [felony-murder] rule begins not with the deadly outcome, but with the felonious background. That someone
engages in a felony lowers the threshold of moral responsibility for the resulting death. If there is a principle behind this way of thinking, it is that a wrongdoer must run the risk that things will turn out worse than she expects. The same principle has
motivated common law courts and legislatures to reject the claim of mistake in cases of abducting infants, statutory rape, and assaulting a police officer. If the act is wrong, even as the defendant conceives the facts to be, then she presumably has
no grounds for complaining if the facts turn out to be worse than she expects. . .

[This mode of thought violates] a basic principle of just punishment. Punishment must be proportional to wrongdoing. When the felony-murder rule converts an accidental death into first-degree murder, then punishment is rendered
disproportionate to the wrong for which the offender is personally responsible. [T]he principle that the wrongdoer must run the risk explicitly obscures the question of actual responsibility for the harmful result.

p. 538

p. 539
JAMES J. TOMKOVICZ, THE ENDURANCE OF THE FELONY-MURDER RULE, 51 WASH. & LEE L. REV. 1429, 1448-1449 (1994): The primary justification offered for the contemporary felony-murder rule is deterrence. . .. One deterrent argument holds
that the threat of a murder conviction for any killing in furtherance of a felony, even an accidental killing, might well induce a felon to forego committing the felony itself... . Another argument . . . maintains that the rule is aimed at discouraging

certain conduct during the felony, not the felony itself. The goal is to encourage greater care in the performance of felonious acts. . .. Still another view suggests that felons who might kill intentionally in order to complete their felonies successfully
will be discouraged . . . because of their awareness that the chance of constructing a defense that would eliminate or mitigate liability is virtually nonexistent and that, therefore, their likely fate is a murder conviction. . . .

The problem with the modern felony-murder doctrine is not only that it seeks practical goals by prescribing severe punishments without proof of fault, but that it does so on the basis of unproven and highly questionable assump-
tions. . .. The number of killings during felonies is relatively low. The subset of such killings that are nonculpable — thus not already subject to the threat of a substantial sanction — is undoubtedly considerably smaller. . .. Moreover, some who are
aware of and even sensitive to the threatened sanction will probably still kill negligently or accidentally.

Admittedly, it would be difficult, if not impossible, to prove that the felony-murder rule does not annually save a considerable number of lives. Nonetheless, in a world in which the evidence is uncertain (or nonexistent) and in which
it seems unlikely that felons actually hear the rule's deterrent message in the ways that courts presume that they do, common sense would suggest putting the burden of proof upon those who contend that deterrent gains are sufficient to out
weigh the infringement of our fundamental philosophy of fault and punishment. . . . Without a credible foundation in established facts, deterrence is not a real justification, but is instead a poor excuse for our infidelity [to fundamental principles of
culpability).

MODEL PENAL CODE AND COMMENTARIES, COMMENT to 210.2 at 37-39 (1980): Principled argument in favor of the felony-murder doctrine is hard to find. The defense reduces to the explanation that Holmes gave for finding the law “intelligible
as it stands”:

[lif experience shows, or is deemed by the law-maker to show, that somehow or other deaths which the evidence makes accidental happen disproportionately often in connection with other felonies, or with resistance to

officers, or if on any other ground of policy it is deemed desirable to make special efforts for the prevention of such deaths, the law-maker may consistently treat acts which, under the known circumstances, are felonious, or

constitute resistance to officers, as having a sufficiently dangerous tendency to be put under a special ban. The law may, therefore, throw on the actor the peril, not only of the consequences foreseen by him, but also

p.539
p. 540

of consequences which, although not predicted by common experience, the legislator apprehends.25

The answer to such arguments is twofold. First, there is no basis in experience for thinking that homicides which the evidence makes accidental occur with disproportionate frequency in connection with specified felonies. Second,
it remains indefensible in principle to use the sanctions that the law employs to deal with murder unless there is at least a finding that the actor's conduct manifested an extreme indifference to the value of human life. The fact that the actor was
engaged in a crime of the kind that is included in the usual first-degree felony-murder enumeration or was an accomplice in such crime, as has been observed, will frequently justify such a finding. Indeed, the probability that such a finding will be
justified seems high enough to warrant the presumption of extreme indifference that Subsection (1)(b) creates. But liability depends, as plainly it should, upon the crucial finding. The result may not differ often under such a formulation from that
which would be reached under some form of the felony-murder rule. But what is more important is that a conviction on this basis rests solidly upon principle.

NOTE ON THE MPC SOLUTION

In light of the foregoing considerations, the American Law Institute recommended eliminating the felony-murder rule. However, the MPC provided that for the purpose of establishing murder by an act “committed recklessly under
circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life,” the fact that the actor is “engaged, or is an accomplice in the commission of, or an attempt to commit, or flight after committing or attempting to commit robbery, rape or
deviate sexual intercourse by force or threat of force, arson, burglary, kidnapping or felonious escape” creates a rebuttable presumption (defined in §1.12(6)) that the required indifference and recklessness existed.

p. 540
p.sat

NOTES ON THE MISDEMEANOR-MANSLAUGHTER RULE

1. The basic doctrine. Just as a felony resulting in death can provide a basis for a murder conviction without proof of malice, in many states a misdemeanor resulting in death can provide a basis for an involuntary manslaughter
conviction without proof of recklessness or negligence. The misdemeanor-manslaughter rule, also known as the unlawful-act doctrine, was reflected in the traditional common-law definition of involuntary manslaughter. The language of Cal. Penal
Code §192(b), drawn from William Blackstone's formulation, is typical: Involuntary manslaughter is a killing “in the commission of an unlawful act, not amounting to a felony; or in the commission of a lawful act which might produce death, in an
unlawful manner, or without due caution and circumspection.” More explicitly, and in more modern language, Oklahoma's homicide statute provides that “[hlomicide is manslaughter . . . [w]hen perpetrated without a design to effect death by a per-
son while engaged in the commission of a misdemeanor.” Okla. Stat. Ann. tit. 21, §711(1) (2021).

In jurisdictions that recognize the misdemeanor-manslaughter rule, the prosecution thus has two theories available to establish involuntary manslaughter. Under the first theory, if a defendant, after driving through a red light, has killed a
pedestrian, the prosecution can argue for involuntary manslaughter on the basis that the defendant's conduct amounted to criminal negligence under the circumstances. See p. 509 supra. Under the second theory, the prosecution need only show
that the defendant's unlawful act caused the death; proof of criminal negligence becomes unnecessary. See State v. Thomas, 211 A.3d 274, 285 (Md. 2019).

Although many jurisdictions no longer recognize the unlawful-act doctrine, and thus limit involuntary manslaughter liability to conduct involving criminal negligence, California and roughly a dozen other states continue to accept it. See
Wayne R. LaFave, 2 Substantive Criminal Law §15.5 (2d ed. 2015).

2. Limitations on the unlawful-act doctrine. In states that retain the unlawful-act doctrine, some of its harshest effects have been moderated by a variety of limitations. Most of these limitations are similar to the ones that apply to
the felony-murder rule.

(@) Proximate cause. In Commonwealth v. Williams, 1 A.2d 812 (Pa. Super. 1938), the defendant had been convicted of manslaughter by vehicle on the basis of his unlawful act of failing to renew his driver's license. The court reversed,
holding that the expiration of the license had no causal connection to the accident, which had resulted from the carelessness of another driver.

(b) Regulatory offenses. Some courts restrict the unlawful-act doctrine to malum in se as opposed to malum prohibitum misdemeanors. E.g., People v. Holtschlag, 684 N.W.2d 730, 740 (Mich. 2004).

(c) Dangerousness. Another approach is to limit the doctrine to misdemeanors that rise to the level of criminal negligence (State v. Green, 647 S.W.2d 736, 746 (W. Va. 2007)), or to violations that “evince a marked disregard for the
safety of others” (State v. Lingman, 91 P.2d 457 (Utah 1939)).

psa
p. 542
NOTES ON STATUTORY REFORM

England abolished all versions of the felony-murder rule by statute in 1957 (Homicide Act of 1957, 5 & 6 Eliz. 2, ch. 11, §1):

Where a person kills another in the course or furtherance of some other offence, the killing shall not amount to murder unless done with the same malice aforethought (express or implied) as is required for a killing to amount

to murder when not done in the course or furtherance of another offence.

A few American legislatures have followed suit,'® but the great majority have retained some version of the felony-murder rule, even in the face of heavy academic and judicial criticism of it. See James J. Tomkovicz, The Endurance of the
Felony-Murder Rule, 51 Wash. & Lee L. Rev. 1429, 1431 (1994). While the influence of the MPC in other areas has been great, it has had little success with its modest proposal to replace the felony-murder rule with a rebuttable presumption. How-
ever, statutes over the years have qualified the severity of the common-law rule in a variety of ways.

1. Limiting the list of eligible felonies. Some states have designated particular felonies (such as rape, arson, burglary, kidnapping, and robbery) as the only felonies for which a felony-murder conviction may be obtained. Other
felonies serve only as the possible basis of a manslaughter conviction (e.g., Ind. Code §35-42-1-4 (2021)) or cannot by themselves serve as the basis for conviction of any form of culpable homicide (N.Y. Penal Law §125.25(3) (2021), p. 468 supra).

2. Grading of felony murder. In states that still permit a wide range of felonies to trigger the felony-murder rule, a few particularly dangerous felonies are designated as the only felonies on which a first-degree felony-murder con-
viction can be obtained. Where this approach is followed (see, e.g., Cal. Penal Code §189 (2021), p. 464 supra), a killing in the course of a non-designated felony still triggers the felony-murder rule, but the offense becomes murder in the second
degree.

3. Requiring a homicidal mens rea. Another approach is to provide that a killing in the course of the felony can constitute murder only when it is otherwise culpable — for example, providing that the defendant must cause the death
“recklessly” (Del. Code Ann. tit. 11, §636 (2021)) or “under circumstances manifesting extreme indifference to the value of human life” (Ark. Code Ann. §5-10-102 (2021). Similarly, in Texas the felony-murder rule applies only when the defendant's
act was “clearly dangerous to human life.” See David Crump, Should We Have Different Views of Felony Murder, Depending on the Governing Statute?, 47 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 113, 118 (2014).

4, Limiting the liability of accomplices. In an important development, California, where prosecutors have made especially assertive use of the felony-murder rule, amended its homicide statute in 2018 to provide that a participant in
a felony who was “not the actual killer” can be convicted of murder only if the participant was an accomplice who intended the killing or was “a major participant in the underlying felony and acted with reckless indifference to human life.” That

p. 542
p. 543
exclusion does not apply, however, if the defendant knew or should have known that the person killed was a peace officer acting in the line of duty. Cal. Penal Code §§189(e), (f) (2021), p. 464 supra. As a result, the California felony-murder rule
continues to permit a murder conviction on a strict liability basis when the defendant is “the actual killer” or when the victim is a police officer. New York also narrows felony-liability for accomplices but casts the limitation as an affirmative defense,
available only when a co-felon caused the death and the accomplice was not armed and had no reason to believe that the co-felon was likely to kill. N.Y. Penal Law §125.25(8) (2021), p. 468 supra.
QUESTIONS: To what extent do these various qualifications meet the criticisms of Macaulay, Tomcovicz, and the Model Penal Code, supra? See David Crump, Reconsidering the Felony Murder Rule in Light of Modern Criticisms, 32 Harv. J.L. &
Pub. Pol'y 1155 (2009).
NOTES ONJUDICIAL REFORM

1. Statutory interpretation. Several state supreme courts have in effect abolished the felony-murder rule by means of statutory interpretation. In People v. Aaron, 299 N.W.2d 304 (Mich. 1980), the statute did not explicitly codify the
felony-murder rule but provided that any murder in the course of designated felonies would be murder of the first degree. Since the statute did not define murder, the court used its common-law authority to reject precedents recognizing the com-
mission of a felony as the basis for a finding of malice and treated the statute as simply raising what is otherwise murder (when malice has been proved directly) to first-degree murder when occurring in the commission of an enumerated felony.
“We believe that it is no longer acceptable to equate the intent to commit a felony with the intent to kill, intent to do great bodily harm, or wanton and willful disregard of the likelihood [of] death or great bodily harm. Today we exercise our role in the
development of the common law by abrogating the common-law felony-murder rule.” Similarly, in State v. Ortega, 817 P.2d 1196 (N.M. 1991), a case of homicide in the course of a kidnapping and robbery, the court read into New Mexico's first-de-
gree felony-murder statute a requirement that the state prove intent to kill or conscious disregard for life.

In Commonwealth v. Brown, 81 N.E.3d 1173, 1179 (Mass. 2017), the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court reached a similar result, likewise relying on its authority to interpret the meaning of “malice”:

[A] defendant may not be convicted of murder without proof of one of the three prongs of malice [i., that the defendant either intended to kill, intended to cause grievous bodily harm, or intended to do an act that, in the

circumstances known to the defendant, a reasonable person would have known created a plain and strong likelihood that death would result]. As a result, in the future, felony-murder is no longer an independent theory of li-

ability for murder. Rather, felony-murder is limited to its statutory role . . . as an aggravating element . . ., permitting a jury to find a defendant guilty of murder in the first degree where the murder was committed in the course

of a felony punishable by life imprisonment even

p. 549
p. 544

if it was not committed with deliberate premeditation or with extreme atrocity or cruelty.

Compare People v. Dillon, 668 P.2d 697 (Cal. 1983), where the California Supreme Court decided not to follow Aaron, even though the wording of California's statute is identical to Michigan's and even though both statutes were based
on the same 1794 Pennsylvania model. The court concluded that subsequent reenactments by the California legislature demonstrated a legislative intent to codify the felony-murder rule.

QUESTIONS: Given long-standing precedents accepting the felony-murder rule, is de facto judicial abrogation of the rule an unjustifiable exercise of judicial authority? Or — given the intense criticism of the rule's foundations — does a decision
like Dillon, which refuses to narrow the meaning of “malice,” violate a court's obligation to develop and apply the common law in a coherent, principled fashion?

2. Constitutional issues. If statutes require the felony-murder rule, to what extent is its application unconstitutional? In Dillon, supra, the court read California's felony-murder statute as imposing first-degree murder liability for a wide
range of robbery killings — from accidental to premeditated homicides — and held that, in order to comply with the constitutional prohibition on cruel and unusual punishment, the sentencing court would have to consider whether the first-degree
penalty, life imprisonment, was disproportionate to the culpability of the defendant in the particular case.

The proportionality problem is especially acute when the felony-murder rule is applied to juvenile defendants. There is growing academic sentiment that imposing felony-murder liability on juveniles should be precluded by statute, or if
not, should be held unconstitutional. E.g., Beth Caldwell, The Twice Diminished Culpability of Juvenile Accomplices to Felony Murder, 11 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 905 (2021). In State v. Harrison, 914 N.W.2d 178, 197 (lowa 2018), the court sustained a
juvenile accomplice’ first-degree murder conviction under a felony-murder theory where the juvenile knew that the co-felon planned to kill, but the court suggested that in other circumstances “the felony-murder rule [might be] unconstitutional as
applied to a certain juvenile offender.”

Nelson E. Roth and Scott E. Sundby argue (The Felony-Murder Rule: A Doctrine at Constitutional Crossroads, 70 Cornell L. Rev. 446 (1985) that the felony-murder rule is unconstitutional because it either conclusively presumes malice
(thus violating the requirement of proof beyond a reasonable doubt) or eliminates malice (thus violating the Eighth Amendment proportionality requirement). In The Queen v. Vaillancourt, [1987] S.C.R. 636, the Canadian Supreme Court held that
because the felony-murder provisions of that country’s Criminal Code permit conviction in the absence of mens rea, they violate the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, in particular §7 (requiring respect for “principles of fundamental jus-
tice”) and §11(d) (guaranteeing the presumption of innocence).

3. Further limitations. We now turn to three judicially improvised limits on the felony-murder rule: the inherently dangerous felony limitation, the merger doctrine, and restrictions on liability for killings not in furtherance of the felonious
objective. In examining these materials, consider whether judicial implementation of the felony-murder rule has or has not adequately mitigated the rule's potential for unfaimess and disproportionate punishment.

p. 544
p. 546
b. The “Inherently Dangerous Felony” Limitation
People v. Phillips
Supreme Court of California
414 P.2d 353 (Cal. 1966)

Topriner J. [Deceased was an eight-year-old child with a fast-growing cancer of the eye. At a medical center, her parents were advised to consent to immediate removal of the eye as the only means of saving or prolonging her life.
However, defendant, a doctor of chiropractics, induced them not to do so by representing that he could cure her without surgery by treatment designed “to build up her resistance.” Defendant charged the parents $700 for his treatment and
medicine. The child died in about six months. At the conclusion of the defendant's trial on charges of murdering the child, the judge instructed the jury that it could convict of second-degree murder if it found that defendant committed the felony of

grand theft (theft by deception) and that the child died as a proximate result. Upon conviction, the defendant appealed, and the California Supreme Court reversed, finding the instruction on felony murder to be erroneous. Previous California cases
had ruled that the felony-murder rule could be triggered only by felonies inherently dangerous to life, and the court ruled that the felony of grand theft did not meet this requirement.]

We have . . . recognized that the felony-murder doctrine expresses a highly artificial concept that deserves no extension beyond its required application. [But the prosecution, aldmitting that grand theft is not inherently dangerous to
life... asks us to encompass the entire course of defendant's conduct so that we may incorporate such elements as would make his crime inherently dangerous. In so framing the definition of a given felony for the purpose of assessing its inherent
peril to life the prosecution would abandon the statutory definition of the felony as such and substitute the factual elements of defendant's actual conduct. In the present case the Attorney General would characterize that conduct as “grand theft
medical fraud,” and this newly created “felony,” he urges, clearly involves danger to human life and supports an application of the felony-murder rule.

To fragmentize the “course of conduct” of defendant so that the felony-murder rule applies if any segment of that conduct may be considered dangerous to life would widen the rule beyond calculation. It would then apply not only to
the commission of specific felonies, which are themselves dangerous to life, but to the perpetration of any felony during which defendant may have acted in such a manner as to endanger life. The proposed approach would entail the rejection of
our holding in Williams [63 Cal. 2d 452, that the elements of the felony in the abstract, not as committed, determine its inherent dangerousness.] [O]nce the Legislature's own definition is discarded, the number or nature of the contextual elements
which could be incorporated into an expanded felony terminology would be limitless. We have been, and remain, unwilling to embark on such an uncharted sea of felony murder.

The felony-murder instruction should not, then, have been given; its rendition, further, worked prejudice upon defendant. It withdrew from the jury the issue of malice, permitting a conviction upon the bare showing that Linda’s death
proximately resulted from conduct of defendant amounting to grand theft. The

p. 546
p. 546
instruction as rendered did not require the jury to find either express malice or the implied malice which is manifested in an “intent with conscious disregard for life to commit acts likely to kill.” (People v. Washington, 62 Cal. 2d 777, 780.)
[Reversed.®]
NOTES ON INHERENT DANGER “IN THE ABSTRACT”

1. Why the abstract approach? In People v. Henderson, 19 Cal. 3d 86 (1977), the California Supreme Court reversed a second-degree felony-murder conviction based on the felony of “false imprisonment . . . effected by violence,
menace, fraud or deceit.” The defendant had held a gun to the head of a hostage. When the hostage attempted to deflect the barrel of the gun, it went off and killed a bystander. The court found that false imprisonment does not necessarily involve
the danger to life required for felony murder because the statutory elements — violence, menace, fraud, or deceit — do not all involve life-endangering conduct. Violence and menace may endanger life, but the other independently sufficient ele-
ments do not. Therefore the offense (in the abstract) is not inherently dangerous to life. The prosecution argued that the matter would not differ in substance if the legislature had created two separate false imprisonment felonies, one by violence or
menace, the other by fraud or deceit. The court disagreed (id. at 95):

The Legislature has not evinced a particular concern for violent as opposed to nonviolent acts of false imprisonment by separate statutory treatment, proscription, or punishment. Accordingly, we cannot conclude that the

cause of deterring homicide during the commission of false imprisonment is better served by imputing malice to one who kills in the course of committing false imprisonment rather than allowing the jury to determine directly

the question of the presence of malice aforethought.

2. How dangerous? The “abstract” approach sets a high bar for holding an offense inherently dangerous. The California courts have held that “for purposes of the second degree felony-murder doctrine, an ‘inherently dangerous
felony’ is an offense carrying ‘a high probability’ that death will result. A less stringent standard would inappropriately expand the scope of the second degree felony-murder rule reducing the seriousness of the act which a defendant must commit
in order to be charged with murder.” People v. Patterson, 778 P.2d 549, 558 (Cal. 1989). Nonetheless, California courts have found the requirement satisfied for many felonies, including the manufacture of methamphetamine. In re White, 246 Cal.
Rptr. 3d 670 (Ct. App. 2019).

3. The scope of the underlying felony. In a 1993 felony-murder case, a California appellate court considered as a predicate felony the offense of “attempt[ing] to elude a pursuing peace officer [while] driv[ing] in a willful or wanton
disregard for the safety of persons or property.” Cal. Veh. Code §2800.2. The court held that
p. 546
p.547
this offense qualified as “inherently dangerous to human life” and therefore could support a conviction for felony murder. Subsequently, to clarify the requirement of “willful or wanton disregard,” the legislature amended §2880.2 in 1996 to specify
that this requirement could be met if the fleeing driver committed three or more violations of the traffic code.

Is the §2800.2 offense still inherently dangerous after the legislature amended its language? People v. Howard, 34 Cal. 4th 1129 (2005), arose after the 1996 amendment. The defendant, after being stopped for a traffic violation,
attempted to flee, leading officers on a high-speed chase and running several red lights and stop signs, at speeds up to 90 miles per hour. He eventually collided with another car and killed its driver. He was convicted of felony murder, based on
the §2800.2 offense. Although — prior to the 1996 amendment — this offense had been held inherently dangerous, the California Supreme Court now held that it was not, because “willful and wanton disregard” could now consist of such conduct
as driving with a suspended license or making a right turn without signaling. In a separate opinion, Justice Brown argued that §2800.2 violations are always inherently dangerous, because a fleeing motorist inevitably endangers pursuing officers.
But she nonetheless concurred in reversal of Howard's conviction; reasoning that the second-degree felony-murder doctrine is “irredeemably arbitrary,” she would “abrogate the rule entirely.” Id. at 1140.

QUESTION: How should the Howard case be decided?

4, Problem. Consider People v. Burroughs, 35 Cal. 3d 824 (1984). Lee Swatsenbarg was diagnosed as having terminal leukemia. He sought treatment from Burroughs, who instructed him to “drink lemonade, salt water, and herb tea,
but consume nothing more for the ensuing 30 days.” Burroughs bathed Swatsenbarg in tinted lights and gave him massages, for an additional fee per session. Within two weeks, Swatsenbarg’s condition deteriorated. Shortly thereafter, he died
from a massive hemorrhage brought on by Burroughs's massages. Because the Phillips decision precluded reliance on grand theft as a predicate felony, prosecutors sought a felony-murder conviction by using the predicate offense of felonious
unlicensed practice of medicine, defined as wilfully practicing “any system or mode of treating the sick [without a valid license] under circumstances or conditions which cause or create a risk of great bodily harm, serious physical or mental illness,
or death.” Burroughs had clearly committed this offense, and he was also convicted of felony murder, with this offense as the predicate felony. Should the predicate offense qualify as inherently dangerous under the California test?

Hines v. State
‘Supreme Court of Georgia
578 S.E.2d 868 (Ga. 2003)
FLETCHER, C.J. While hunting, Robert Lee Hines mistook his friend Steven Wood for a turkey and shot him dead. A jury convicted Hines of felony murder based on the underlying crime of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon, but
acquitted him of a felony-murder count based on the underlying felony of misuse
p.547
p. 548
ofa firearm while hunting. .. .1 [T]he evidence at trial showed that, late in the afternoon of April 8, 2001, Hines and some of his friends and relatives went turkey hunting. They split into two groups, with Hines and his friend Randy Stoker hunting
together in one area, and the victim, the victim's wife, and Hines’s son hunting in a different area, approximately one-fourth mile away. As the sky was growing dark, Hines heard a turkey gobble, “saw it fan out and shot.” Hines’s shot went through
heavy foliage and hit the victim approximately eighty feet away. Immediately thereafter, the victim's wife screamed, “You shot Wood.” Hines and his son went for help, but the victim died before help could arrive.

. .. Hines contends that a convicted felon’s possession of a firearm while turkey hunting cannot be one of the inherently dangerous felonies required to support a conviction of felony murder. A felony is “inherently dangerous” when it is
“dangerous per se” or “by its circumstances create[s] a foreseeable risk of death.” Hulme v. State, 273 Ga. 676, 678 (2001). Depending on the facts, possession of a firearm by a convicted felon can be an inherently dangerous felony. . ..2

In Ford v. State, 262 Ga. 602 (1992), the defendant was a convicted felon who was unloading a handgun when it accidentally discharged, went through the floor, and killed an occupant of the apartment below. A jury convicted Ford for
felony murder based on his felonious possession of a firearm. This court reversed, finding that, because no evidence showed the defendant knew there was an apartment below him or that the victim was present, his possession of a firearm could
not support a conviction of felony murder.

In contrast to Ford, Hines intentionally fired his shotgun intending to hit his target. He had been drinking before he went hunting, and there was evidence that he had been drinking while hunting. He knew that other hunters were in the
area and was unaware of their exact location. He also knew that other people visited the area in which he was hunting. He took an unsafe shot at dusk, through heavy foliage, at a target eighty feet away that he had not positively identified as a
turkey. Under these circumstances, we conclude that Hines's illegal possession of a firearm created a foreseeable risk of death. Accordingly, Hines's violation of the prohibition against convicted felons possessing firearms was an inherently dan-
gerous felony that could support a felony-murder conviction. . . .

Judgment affirmed.

Sears, P.J., dissenting. . . . In Ford . . . we did not specify how to determine whether a particular felony, whether by its nature or as it was committed, was inherently dangerous to human life. Because of the severe punishments that
accompany

p. 548

p.549
acconviction of murder . . . | conclude that for purposes of our felony-murder doctrine, a felony is inherently dangerous per se or as committed if it carries “a high probability that [a human] death will result.” People v. Patterson, 778 P.2d 549, 558
(Cal. 1989). This standard will ensure that our felony-murder rule is not inappropriately expanded by “reducing the seriousness of the act which a defendant must commit in order to be charged with murder.” Id.

. .. The fact that Hines was hunting, a dangerous sport; the fact that he had been drinking . . . ; the fact that he was hunting at dusk; and the fact that he fired a shot when he knew other hunters were in the general area. . . may establish
that Hines was negligent, but do not establish that his acts created a high probability that death to a human being would result, or that he had a “life-threatening state of mind.” . .. Even though Hines may not, as stated by the majority, have
positively identified his target as a turkey, he had to make a split-second decision regarding his target and concluded, based on hearing a gobble and seeing something “fan out,” that the object was a turkey. I cannot conclude that, under these
circumstances, the failure of the hunter to identify his target beyond doubt carried a high probability that a human being would be killed or that he acted with a “life-threatening state of mind.” The death in this case is clearly a tragic accident. . . .
But the sanction of life in prison for murder should be reserved for cases in which the defendant's moral failings warrant such punishment. Here, the application of the felony-murder statute to Hines's actions punishes him more severely than his
culpability merits. [He] will be serving the same punishment — life in prison — as an arsonist convicted of felony murder who firebombed an apartment that he knew was occupied, causing the death of two young children, and the same punishment
as an armed robber convicted of felony murder who entered a store with a firearm and shot and killed a store employee. This result is unwarranted and unnecessary, as Hines could be prosecuted and convicted of an appropriate lesser crime, such
as involuntary manslaughter or the misuse of a firearm while hunting.

. .. Hunting is a time-honored recreational activity encouraged by the State of Georgia and enjoyed by many of our State’s citizens. No doubt a number of hunters have probably engaged in negligent hunting practices similar to those in
this case. Although | do not condone such careless practices, neither can | agree with subjecting so many hunters to the possibility of spending life in prison when they do not fastidiously follow proper hunting procedures and accidentally shoot a
fellow hunter.

NOTES ON INHERENT DANGER “AS COMMITTED”

1. The degree of danger. Only a few American jurisdictions follow the California approach of limiting the felony-murder rule to felonies that are dangerous “in the abstract.” See Annot., 50 A.L.R.3d 397 (2021). Instead, most permit

a felony (even a nonviolent felony like theft) to qualify if it is committed in a dangerous way. Under this approach, courts have upheld felony-murder convictions based on a wide range of predicate felonies found to be inherently dangerous “as

committed.” E.g., Flanders v. Commonwealth, 838 S.E.2d 51, 61-62 (Va. 2020) (leaving scene of a vehicle accident was inherently dangerous as committed). In Nicholson v. State, 196 A.3d 480, 491 (Md. Ct. Spec. App. 2018), the predicate felony
of marijuana
p.549
p. 550
possession with intent to distribute was held inherently dangerous because the $3,200 value of the marijuana in question “suggested that the stakes were high and potentially dangerous.”

But how dangerous does the felony have to be? What likelihood of death does the Hines majority consider sufficient? What likelihood is sufficient for the dissenting judge? Should inherent danger to life mean that serious bodily harm is
likely, that it is possible, or only that such harm is not completely unforeseeable?

2. Who decides? Although the justices in Hines differ about the degree of foreseeability required, they agree that they themselves determine whether this defendant's offense was sufficiently dangerous under all the circumstances. The
majority declares: “[W]e conclude that Hines's violation .. . created a foreseeable risk of death,” and the dissent states: “I conclude that the possession of a firearm by Hines was not . . . inherently dangerous” (emphasis added). This appears to be
the usual practice in Georgia; the justices themselves determine whether the felony was inherently dangerous as committed. E.g., Moon v. State, 858 S.E.2d 18, 22 (Ga. 2021) (“We have no trouble concluding that, based on the facts of this case,
Moon's conduct in possessing the gun while being a convicted felon was inherently dangerous.”). But if dangerousness under all the circumstances is required for conviction, how can this factual determination be taken away from the jury?

Some courts hold that “[t]he proper procedure is . . . for the trier of fact to determine if a felony is inherently dangerous in the manner and the circumstances in which it was committed.” People v. Stewart, 663 A.2d 912, 920 (R.I. 1995).
Is this a more principled approach? Or does it — by requiring the prosecution to litigate dangerousness in each case — defeat a major purpose of the felony-murder rule?

When the dangerousness determination is left to the jury, is there any practical difference between second-degree murder on a felony-murder theory and second-degree murder on a theory of ordinary malice — i.e., extreme reck-
lessness that creates a great danger to life? Consider the facts of Stewart, supra. Stewart, the mother of a two-month-old infant, went on a crack binge for two to three days, and during this period she failed to feed the little boy, who died from
dehydration. The prosecution did not claim that Stewart intentionally withheld care, but only that she had neglected her son because in her intoxicated state she had forgotten to feed him. Instead of alleging murder on a theory of conscious reck-
lessness, the prosecution argued that Stewart was guilty of felonious child neglect and that this felony, inherently dangerous to life under the circumstances, was the cause of the infant's death. The Rhode Island Supreme Court upheld a second-
degree felony-murder conviction obtained on this basis.

QUESTION: If the felony-murder theory had been unavailable, could Stewart be convicted of second-degree murder on the basis of ordinary malice?!
3. Evaluating the abstract and as committed approaches. Is the “as committed” approach a sensible way to manage the felony-murder rule? Would it be better to abandon the inherent-danger requirement entirely, so that any
felony resulting
p.550
p.551
in death could support a murder conviction? If not, how can courts limit the reach of the rule and preserve the legislative preference for maintaining discrete degrees of homicide, while also honoring the legislative preference for denying that cali-
bration of culpability for those who commit (certain) felonies?
c. The Merger Doctrine
People v. Burton

Supreme Court of California
491 P.2d 793 (Cal. 1971)

SULLIVAN, Justice.

[Defendant killed a person in the course of committing an armed robbery. The jury found the defendant guilty of first-degree felony murder, and defendant appealed. Defendant contends] that it was error, in the circumstances of this
case, to instruct the jury on first-degree felony murder, because the underlying felony was armed robbery. He claims that armed robbery is an offense included in fact within the offense of murder and, therefore, under the rule announced in People
Vv. Ireland, 70 Cal. 2d 522, as applied in People v. Wilson (1969) 1 Cal. 3d 431, such offense cannot support a felony-murder instruction. . .

[In Ireland the defendant, having shot and killed his wife, claimed that alcohol, prescribed medications, and cumulative emotional pressure established diminished capacity sufficient to preclude the malice required for murder.] The
judge instructed the jury on the felony-murder rule, utilizing assault with a deadly weapon as the supporting felony. The effect of such instruction [was] to substantially eviscerate the defense of diminished capacity to negative malice, since malice
was imputed. The net effect of this imputation would be to hold that all intentional killings accomplished by means of a deadly weapon . . . could never be mitigated to manslaughter, since all such killings included in fact an assault with a deadly
weapon. We held that such effect was impermissible: “This kind of bootstrapping finds support neither in logic nor in law. We therefore hold that a second degree felony-murder instruction may not properly be given when it is based upon a felony
which is an integral part of the homicide and which the evidence produced by the prosecution shows to be an offense included in fact within the offense charged.”

In Wilson the underlying felony which supported the felony-murder instruction was burglary — specifically entry coupled with the intent to commit assault with a deadly weapon. [The defendant, intending to assault his estranged wife,
entered her home, then entered the bathroom where she had taken refuge, and shot and killed her.] Since in Ireland we had held that assault with a deadly weapon could not support an instruction on second-degree felony murder, in Wilson we
were faced with the question whether it could support first-degree felony murder because coupled with an entry. We concluded there was no meaningful distinction between assaults with deadly weapons indoors and outdoors, saying: “Where the
intended felony of the burglar is an assault with a deadly weapon, the likelihood of homicide from the lethal weapon is not significantly increased by the site of the assault. Furthermore, the burglary statute in this state includes within its definition
numerous structures other than dwellings as to which there can be no conceivable

p.551

p.552
basis for distinguishing between an assault with a deadly weapon outdoors and a burglary in which the felonious intent is solely to assault with a deadly weapon.” Thus, even though burglary is one of the felonies specifically enumerated in Penal
Code section 189, we excluded burglary from the operation of the felony-murder rule in those cases where the intended felony was assault with a deadly weapon for the reasons stated in Ireland.

Defendant contends that the language and reasoning of Ireland and Wilson compel us to hold that armed robbery is included in fact within murder and, therefore, cannot support a felony-murder instruction. He argues that armed
robbery includes as a necessary element assault with a deadly weapon by the following chain of reasoning: robbery “is the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence, and against his
will, accomplished by means of force or fear” (Pen. Code, §211); thus robbery is assault (force or fear directed against a person) coupled with larceny, which when accomplished by means of a deadly weapon necessarily includes in fact assault
with a deadly weapon; any charge of murder with respect to a killing arising out of armed robbery then necessarily includes in fact assault with a deadly weapon and cannot support a felony-murder instruction.

The net effect of defendant's argument would be to eliminate the application of the felony-murder rule to all unlawful killings which were committed by means of a deadly weapon, since in each case the homicide would include in fact
assault with a deadly weapon, even if the homicide resulted from the commission of one of the six felonies (arson, rape, mayhem, robbery, burglary or lewd and lascivious acts upon the body of a child) enumerated in section 189 of the Penal
Code. . . . [W]e reject this interpretation of that language and its consequent assertion that the felony-murder rule has been abolished in all homicides accomplished by means of a deadly weapon as unwarranted both in logic and in principle.

We conclude that there is a very significant difference between deaths resulting from assaults with a deadly weapon, where the purpose of the conduct was the very assault which resulted in death, and deaths resulting from conduct
for an independent felonious purpose, such as robbery or rape, which happened to be accomplished by a deadly weapon. . . . Our inquiry cannot stop with the fact that death resulted from the use of a deadly weapon and, therefore, technically
included an assault with a deadly weapon, but must extend to an investigation of the purpose of the conduct. In both Ireland and Wilson the purpose of the conduct which eventually resulted in a homicide was . . . the infliction of bodily injury. . . .
The desired infliction of bodily injury was in each case not satisfied short of death. Thus, there was a single course of conduct with a single purpose.

However, in the case of armed robbery, as well as the other felonies enumerated in section 189 of the Penal Code, there is an independent felonious purpose, namely in the case of robbery to acquire money or property belonging
to another. Once a person has embarked upon a course of conduct for one of the enumerated felonious purposes, he comes directly within a clear legislative warning — if a death results from his commission of that felony it will be first-degree
murder, regardless of the circumstances. . . . “The purpose of the felony-murder rule is to deter felons from killing negligently or accidentally by holding them strictly responsible for killings they commit.” The Legislature has said in effect that this
deterrent purpose outweighs the normal legislative policy of examining the individual state of mind

p.552

p. 559
of each person causing an unlawful killing . . . and calibrating our treatment of the person accordingly. Once a person perpetrates or attempts to perpetrate one of the enumerated felonies, then in the judgment of the Legislature, he is no longer
entitled to such fine judicial calibration, but will be deemed guilty of first-degree murder for any homicide committed in the course thereof.

Wilson, when properly understood, does not eliminate this rule as urged by defendant, but merely excludes from its effect one small area of conduct, which would be irrationally included, due to the unusual nature of burglary. . . . In
the normal case, burglary [is] undertaken with an independent felonious purpose, namely to acquire the property of another. In such instances the felony-murder rule would apply . . . , even if the burglary were accomplished with a deadly weapon.
However, in Wilson the entry was coupled with the intent to commit assault with a deadly weapon, the defendant in that case bursting through the bathroom door intending to do violent injury upon the body of his wife. We were there presented
with the exact situation we faced in Ireland, namely a single purpose, a single course of conduct, except that in Wilson the single course of conduct happened to include an entry, and thus technically became burglary. ... We merely excluded
from the first-degree felony-murder rule the special circumstances of Wilson where the entry was with the intent to commit assault with a deadly weapon. . . .

Defendant in this case by embarking upon the venture of armed robbery brought himself within the class of persons who the Legislature has concluded must avoid causing death or bear the consequences of first-degree murder. The
trial judge quite correctly instructed on felony murder based on homicides directly resulting from the commission of armed robbery.

[Reversed on other grounds.]

NOTES ON THE MERGER DOCTRINE

Although a few jurisdictions permit felonious assault to serve as a predicate felony that automatically converts a resulting death into murder,” the great majority acknowledge the need for some “merger” doctrine, in order to ensure that
the felony-murder rule does not obliterate grading distinctions the legislature itself seems to have desired. Maryland, until relatively recently, permitted assault to serve as a predicate felony, but in State v. Jones, 155 A.3d 492 (Md. Ct. Spec. App.
2017), the court overruled that case law and adopted the merger doctrine. See also Rose v. State, 255 P.3d 291, 293 (Nev. 2011).

Despite near-unanimous acceptance of the need for a merger rule, courts have difficulty determining which felonies should merge. See David Crump, Assaultive Felony Murder: Homicide with Intent to Cause Serious Injury, 55 Santa
Clara L. Rev. 247, 252-257 (2015). To keep the issues in focus, the following Notes center on the law of a single jurisdiction (California), but comparable questions are unavoidable in any jurisdiction that recognizes some sort of felony-murder rule.

p. 559
p. 554

1. Enumerated felonies and first-degree felony murder. Two tests commonly used to determine merger are ()) whether the felony is “included in fact” in the homicide and (li) whether the felony is “independent” of the homicide. As
Burton indicates, the first test would require merger in all robbery cases, a result plainly in conflict with the legislative intent in enumerating this crime as a basis for felony murder. The “independent purpose” test avoids this result and requires
merger only in relatively uncommon situations like Wilson, where the only objective of the burglary was to commit an assault. Even so, is Wilson consistent with the legislative decision to single out burglary as a specifically enumerated felony-
murder offense? Or does Wilson simply recognize that the facts in that case didn't involve the kind of burglary the legislature had in mind when it recognized heat-of-passion as a factor mitigating murder to manslaughter and listed burglary as a
first-degree felony-murder predicate along with crimes like arson, rape, robbery, and kidnapping?!>

Even if sound as a matter of statutory interpretation or policy, the Wilson holding produces anomalies of its own. Consider these problems:

(@) Indoors versus outdoors. Most jurisdictions reject the Wilson holding and permit burglary to support a conviction for first-degree felony murder, even when the defendant's only objective was to assault the victim. E.g., People v.
Miller, 297 N.E.2d 85 (N.Y. 1973). These courts generally support their conclusion by arguing that assaults committed indoors are more dangerous than those committed outside. Is that claim convincing? And even if itis, why is dangerousness rel-
evant to the merger question? Consider two crimes committed outdoors. In the first, the defendant sees a well-dressed person on the street, pushes the person to the ground, and steals the person’s wallet. In the second, the defendant, after being
insulted and beaten by a person the defendant encounters in the street, shoots the person in anger, intending to kill. Which crime is more dangerous to human life? Which can be invoked as a basis for a felony-murder conviction if the victim dies?

(b) Non-assaultive and non-independent purposes. Under Wilson, a defendant who enters a home intending to steal a TV is guilty of first-degree murder if the homeowner dies as an accidental result of the burglary, but a defendant
who enters the home and kills the homeowner intentionally might not be guilty of first-degree murder. If this approach makes sense, what should be the result when a defendant enters a home intending to kill one person but accidentally kills
someone else? Should the merger rule apply, so that the defendant's mental state would be assessed under all the circumstances, or should the felony-murder rule apply (because the defendant had a purpose independent of the homicide actu-
ally committed), making this a case of first-degree murder automatically? Isn't

p.554
p. 555
it “anomalous to place the person who intends to attack one person and in the course of the assault kills another inadvertently . .. in a worse position than the person who from the outset intended to attack both persons and killed one or both”?12

Consider People v. Farley, 46 Cal. 4th 1053 (2009). The defendant became so obsessed with Laura Black, a fellow employee, that he was fired, but he continued to stalk and harass her. One day he entered her place of work armed with
a semiautomatic weapon and began firing, killing seven people and wounding (but not killing) four others, including Black. Under California precedent, if Farley's sole intent had been to assault just one of the workers — Black — he would be guilty
of seven counts of first-degree felony murder. But if Farley had intended to assault all 11 workers, he would be permitted to raise mitigating mens rea defenses. The California Supreme Court moved to eliminate this anomaly, but not by permitting
merger in both scenarios. Instead, the court overruled Wilson and held that burglary and other enumerated felonies would never merge.2° The court concluded that “there is no room for interpretation when the Legislature has defined first degree
felony murder to include any killing ‘committed in the perpetration of, or attempt to perpetrate, . . . burglary.’ [T]he power to define crimes lies exclusively with the Legislature.” Id. at 1119.

QUESTIONS: Is Farley sound? Given the absence of legislative history indicating the legislature's intentions with respect to a fact situation like Wilson, is the court's reliance on statutory wording persuasive? In any case, does Farley eliminate the
dilemmas of first-degree felony murder? Can you think of new anomalies — results under the Farley approach — that the legislature might not have intended?

2. Non-enumerated felonies and second-degree felony murder. In People v. Mattison, 4 Cal. 3d 177 (1971), the defendant had supplied methyl alcohol to a fellow incarcerated person, who died from ingesting it. Applying the
independent-purpose test, the court found merger inappropriate and upheld a conviction for second-degree felony murder, based on the offense of furnishing the drug. In People v. Robertson, 34 Cal. 4th 156 (2004), the defendant shot and killed
a person he believed was trying to steal hubcaps from his car. In defense he claimed he had not intended to kill but was only trying to scare the victim. The court again found merger inappropriate and upheld a second-degree felony-murder con-
viction, based this time on the felony of discharging a firearm in a grossly negligent manner (Cal. Penal Code §246.3). The court held that the independent purpose necessary for felony murder was established by the defendant's defense — that he
was merely trying to frighten away the thief. But three dissenting justices expressed concern over the irony that what might be an accidental killing or involuntary manslaughter became murder because the defendant denied having an intent to kill.
Justice Brown's dissent noted that the merger rule “was intended to avoid elevating

p. 555
p. 556
every felonious assault that ends in death to second-degree murder, a result that would usurp most of the law of homicide.” She then observed:

This [explanation for the merger rule] begins with a nonsequitur from which it never recovers. The merger doctrine applied in this fashion actually ensures the Legislature's careful calibration of culpability will be ignored in

precisely those cases where the absence of malice is a critical issue. Thus, in cases involving intentional assaults — where there will likely be evidence of premeditation and malice — the People must prove every element

of the crime. In cases where evidence of malice is likely to be absent or highly equivocal, the second-degree felony-murder rule makes proof of malice unnecessary and imposes murder liability for what might otherwise be

manslaughter. It takes no genius to discern that a rule that relieves the People of the need to prove malice because the defendant asserts he did not harbor any is problematic. . . . The problem is: second-degree felony mur-

der . . . is incompatible with the idea of careful gradations of liability.

The California Supreme Court was forced to revisit these second-degree felony-murder issues once more in the case that follows.

People v. Chun
Supreme Court of California
203 P.3d 425 (Cal. 2009)

Chin, J. In this murder case, the trial court instructed the jury on second degree felony murder with shooting at an occupied vehicle under Penal Code section 246 the underlying felony.

[On September 13, 2003, Judy Onesavanh, Sophal Ouch, and Bounthavy Onethavong] were driving to the store . . . ina blue Mitsubishi that Onesavanh's father owned. Onesavanh’s brother, George, also drives the car. The police
consider George to be highly ranked in the Asian Boys street gang (Asian Boys). That evening Ouch was driving, with Onesavanh in the front passenger seat and Onethavong behind Ouch. While they were stopped .. . at a traffic light, a blue Honda
with tinted windows pulled up beside them. [G]unfire erupted from the Honda, hitting all three occupants of the Mitsubishi. Onethavong was killed. . . . Onesavanh was hit in the back and seriously wounded. Ouch was shot in the cheek and suf-
fered a fractured jaw.

Ouch and Onesavanh identified the Honda’s driver as... Rathana Chan, a member of the Tiny Rascals Gangsters (Tiny Rascals), a [rival] criminal street gang. . .. Chan was never found. . . . Two months after the shooting, [defendant]
was arrested and subsequently . . . admitted he was in the backseat of the Honda at the time [of the shooting. He] also admitted he fired a .38-caliber firearm. He said he did not point the gun at anyone; he just wanted to scare them.

Defendant . .. was charged with murder . . ., two counts of attempted murder, [and] shooting into an occupied vehicle. . .. The court also instructed the jury on second degree felony murder based on shooting at an occupied motor
vehicle

p. 556
p.557
(§246). . .. The jury found defendant guilty of second degree murder [but] acquitted defendant of both counts of attempted murder. . . .

To avoid the anomaly of putting a person who merely intends to frighten the victim in a worse legal position than the person who actually intended to shoot at the victim, . . . we need to reconsider our holdings in Robertson [p. 555
supra]. When the underlying felony is assaultive in nature, such as a violation of section 246 or 246.3 [discharging a firearm in a grossly negligent manner}, we now conclude that the felony merges with the homicide and cannot be the basis of
a felony-murder instruction. An “assaultive” felony is one that involves a threat of immediate violent injury. . . . In determining whether a crime merges, the court looks to its elements and not the facts of the case. Accordingly, if the elements of
the crime have an assaultive aspect, the crime merges with the underlying homicide even if the elements also include conduct that is not assaultive. For example, in People v. Smith, [35 Cal. 3d 798 (1984)], the court noted that child abuse under
section 273a “includes both active and passive conduct, i.e., child abuse by direct assault and child endangering by extreme neglect.” Looking to the facts before it, the court decided the offense was “of the assaultive variety,” and therefore
merged. . . . It reserved the question whether the nonassaultive variety would merge. . . . Under the approach we now adopt, both varieties would merge. . .. This approach both avoids the necessity of consulting facts that might be disputed and
extends the protection of the merger doctrine to the potentially less culpable defendant whose conduct is not assaultive. .. .

We do not have to decide at this point exactly what felonies are assaultive in nature, .. . and which are inherently collateral to the resulting homicide and do not merge. But shooting at an occupied vehicle under section 246 is assaultive
in nature and hence cannot serve as the underlying felony for purposes of the felony-murder rule. . .

We overrule People v. Robertson. . . . This conclusion means the trial court erred in this case in instructing the jury on the second degree felony-murder rule. [The court went on to hold that this error was harmless because no reasonable
juror could have found that defendant participated in the shooting without also concluding that he harbored implied malice.]

Moreno, J. . .. The majority's reformulation of the merger doctrine is an improvement, but it does not correct the basic flaw in the felony-murder rule; that it is largely unnecessary and, in those unusual instances in which it would
produce a different result, may be unfair. . .. Only in those rare cases in which it is not clear that the defendant acted in conscious disregard of life will the second degree felony-murder rule make a difference, but those are precisely the rare cases
in which the rule might result in injustice. | would eliminate the second degree felony-murder rule and rely instead upon the wisdom of juries to recognize those situations in which a defendant commits second degree murder by killing the victim
during the commission of a felony that is inherently dangerous to life.

QUESTIONS

Has California now solved the merger problem? How should other jurisdictions deal with it? Where the felony-murder rule is grounded in statute, how should

p.557
p. 558

courts preserve consistency and fairness in felony-murder cases, while also respecting the legislative intent to impose more severe punishment when death results from commission of a felony? How should a legislature shape its homicide grading

provisions to ensure just punishment in such cases?

d. Killings Not “In Furtherance” of the Felony

INTRODUCTORY NOTE

The felony-murder rule applies only when the act of killing is done in furtherance of the felony. In the materials considered so far, this condition has been easily met. In this section we deal with three situations where this requirement
makes felony-murder liability less clear — situations where the lethal act arguably occurs after commission of the felony, where the lethal act arguably is unrelated to the felony, and where the lethal act is committed by someone resisting the
felony.

1. Lethal acts after commission of the felony. Suppose that a burglar causes a fatal accident while driving away from the scene of the crime. If that action is considered necessary to successfully complete the crime, it would be “in
furtherance” of the felony, and the burglar would be guilty of murder — first-degree murder in many jurisdictions. But if the accident occurred after the getaway was complete, the burglar might be guilty only of involuntary manslaughter or of no
crime at all.

Consider People v. Gillis, 712 N.W.2d 419 (Mich. 2006). When a homeowner detected the defendant trying to break in, the defendant abandoned the attempt and drove away. Ten to 15 minutes later, about ten miles from the home, a
trooper spotted a car matching the homeowner's description and tried to stop it. The defendant sped away and collided with another vehicle, killing two of its occupants. Did these deaths occur in the perpetration of the burglary? Was Gillis still
escaping from the commission of that offense, or — having already escaped — was Gillis merely attempting to flee from the officer's highway stop? The Michigan Supreme Court, by a 3-2 majority, ruled that Gillis was fleeing from the burglary and
hence was guilty of first-degree murder. Do you agree?

Would the result in Gillis be the same if the trooper had stopped Gillis not because the car matched the homeowner's description, but only because the car was exceeding the speed limit? Would the answer depend on how far above
the speed limit the car was traveling? Or suppose Gillis had stopped for a burger before resuming the drive. Would a fatal accident right after that point make Gillis guilty of first-degree murder?

2. Lethal acts unrelated to the felony. Suppose that A, after entering a building to commit felony arson, sees a tenant whom A decides to rob, and in the process A accidentally kills the tenant. The “in furtherance” requirement does
not seem to matter here because A is guilty of felony murder, regardless of whether the fatal act furthers the original arson plan; the predicate felony of robbery is sufficient by itself to establish felony murder. But the “in furtherance” requirement

becomes important when A has a confederate (B) who helped plan the arson. If the robbery by A is unrelated to the arson plan, then B is not guilty of either the robbery or the resulting homicide. But if the robbery somehow furthers the arson plan,
B could be guilty of first-degree murder.
p. 558
p.559

The latter conclusion, of course, assumes that B can be held responsible for the acts of A. We have not examined that issue in detail yet, because the felony-murder cases previously considered focus on the liability of a single perpetra-
tor. As we have seen, that person’s liability can increase dramatically when the felony-murder rule applies. But when multiple confederates are involved — a common situation — there is an additional complication, because the felony-murder rule
may (or may not) increase the liability of co-felons who do not themselves commit the immediately lethal act.

Liability in these situations turns on the doctrines of complicity and conspiracy, which we consider in Chapter 7, infra. For present purposes it is sufficient to keep in mind the core principle — people are usually liable for the criminal
acts of someone else when they intentionally aid or encourage those acts or when those acts are reasonably foreseeable in furtherance of a common goal. The “in furtherance” requirement therefore does double duty in cases involving several co-
felons: It determines when felon A is subject to the felony-murder rule for A’s own lethal acts, and it determines when those lethal acts subject A’s confederates to felony-murder liability. See Steven R. Morrison, Defending Vicarious Felony Mur-
der, 47 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 129, 132 (2014).

Now consider People v. Cabaltero, 87 P.2d 364 (Cal. Ct. App. 1939). V, a lookout during a robbery, panicked at the approach of a car and fired shots at the occupants. The leader of the group, angered by the lookout's stupidity, shot
and killed V. The leader can, of course, be convicted of murder. Can the other members of the group be convicted of murder as well? The court upheld first-degree felony-murder convictions of all the participants, on the ground that the shooting
helped ensure the success of the ongoing robbery. Do you agree? What arguments could the defense make to support the contrary result? See Cavitt v. Cullen, 728 F.3d 1000 (9th Cir. 2013).

3. Lethal acts by persons resisting the felony. The most difficult and most frequently litigated of the “in-furtherance” problems concern the responsibility of people who are committing felonies for deaths resulting from the actions of
police officers and private citizens who try to thwart the attempted crime. Consider the material that follows.

State v. Canola
‘Supreme Court of New Jersey
374 A.2d 20 (N.J. 1977)

Conroro, J. [The owner of a jewelry store], in an attempt to resist an armed robbery, engaged in a physical skirmish with one of the four robbers. A second conspirator, called upon for assistance, began shooting, and the store owner
returned the gunfire. Both the owner and the felon, one Lloredo, were fatally shot in the exchange, the latter by the firearm of the owner.

Defendant and two others were indicted on two counts of murder [and] one count of robbery. . . . The murder counts were based on the deaths, respectively, of the robbery victim and the cofelon. After trial on the murder counts

p.559
. 560
defendant was found guilty on both and was sentenced to concurrent terms of life imprisonment. [The Appellate Division upheld both convictions. The supreme court granted a petition for certification addressed to homicide of the co-felon.]

Conventional formulations of the felony-murder rule would not seem to encompass liability in this case. [T]he early formulations . . . were concerned solely with situations where the felon or a confederate did the actual killing. [The
traditional view is that], at least in theory, the doctrine of felony murder does not extend to a killing, although growing out of the commission of the felony, if directly attributable to the act of one other than the defendant or those associated with him
in the unlawful enterprise. . . . This rule is sometimes rationalized on the “agency” theory of felony murder.2 [The] contrary view . . . would attach liability under the felony-murder rule for any death proximately resulting from the unlawful activity —
even the death of a cofelon — notwithstanding the killing was by one resisting the crime. . . .

At one time the proximate cause theory was espoused by the Pennsylvania Supreme Court. . .. Commonwealth v. Almeida, 68 A.2d 595 (Pa. 1949) . . ., involving the killing of a policeman shot by other police attempting to apprehend
robbers[_] [T]he question later arose whether [that theory] should be applied to an effort to inculpate a defendant for the killing of his cofelon at the hands of the victim of the crime. Commonwealth v. Redline, 137 A.2d 472 (Pa. 1958). The court there
held against liability[, concluding] that “in order to convict for felony-murder, the killing must have been done by the defendant or by an accomplice or confederate or by one acting in furtherance of the felonious undertaking.” The court refused,
however, actually to overrule the Almeida decision, thereby creating a distinction . . . between the situation in which the victim was an innocent party and the killing therefore merely “excusable” and that in which the deceased was a felon and
the killing thus “justifiable.” Twelve years later the Pennsylvania court did overrule Almeida in a case involving Almeida’s companion, Smith. (Commonwealth ex rel. Smith v. Myers, 261 A.2d 550 (Pa. 1970),) The court noted, inter alia, the harsh
criticism leveled against the common-law felony rule, its doubtful deterrent effect, the failure of the cases cited in Almeida to support the conclusions reached therein, the inappropriateness of tort proximate-cause principles to homicide prosecu-
tion, and the “will-of-the-wisp” distinction drawn by the Almeida court between justifiable and excusable homicides. . . .

To be distinguished from the situation before us here . . . are the so-called “shield” cases. . . . Taylor v. State, 55 S.W. 961 (Tex. Cr. App. 1900), and Keaton v. State, 57 S.W. 1125 (Tex. Cr. App. 1900). In attempting to escape after rob-
bing a train, defendants thrust the brakeman in front of them as a shield, as a result of which he was fatally shot by law officers. The court had no difficulty in finding

p. 560

p.561
defendants guilty of murder. The court in Taylor noted . . . that a person could not be held liable for homicide unless the act is either actually or constructively committed by him, but indicated it was inapplicable to a case where defendants forced
deceased to occupy a place of danger in order that they might carry out the crime. In Keaton, the court said defendant would be responsible for the “reasonable, natural and probable result of his act” of placing deceased in danger of his life. The
conduct of the defendants in cases such as these is said to reflect “express malice,” justifying a murder conviction. .. .

Most modern progressive thought in criminal jurisprudence favors restriction rather than expansion of the felony-murder rule. [Allthough the rule was logical at its inception, when all felonies were punishable by death, its survival to
modern times when other felonies are not thought to be as blameworthy as premeditated killings is discordant with rational and enlightened views of criminal culpability and liability. [I]t appears to us regressive to extend the application of the
felony-murder rule. . . to lethal acts of third persons not in furtherance of the felonious scheme. The language of [our] statute does not compel it,2 and . . . is entirely compatible with the traditional limitations of the rule. Tort concepts of foreseeabil-
ity and proximate cause have shallow relevance to culpability for murder in the first degree. Gradations of criminal liability should accord with [the] degree of moral culpability for the actor's conduct. . . .

The judgment of the Appellate Division is modified so as to strike the conviction and sentencing of defendant for murder of the cofelon Lloredo.

SULLIVAN, J. (concurring in result only). The practical result of the majority holding is that even though some innocent person or a police officer be killed during the commission of an armed robbery, the felon would bear no criminal
responsibility of any kind for that killing as long as it was not at the hand of the felon or a confederate. The legislative intent, as | see it, is otherwise. . . . The only exception | would recognize would be the death of a cofelon, which could be classi-
fied as a justifiable homicide and not within the purview of the statute. . ..

NOTES

1. Who does the killing? Under the agency theory, the identity of the actual killer is crucial; the felony-murder rule applies only if the act of killing is done by a participant in the felony. Under the proximate-cause theory, in contrast, the
central issue is whether the killing (regardless of who did it) is within the foreseeable risk in committing the felony.

p.561
p. 562

Although most American jurisdictions adhere to the agency theory,21 a number of states use the proximate-cause approach.22 Complicating the picture are statutes that arguably (but ambiguously) introduce proximate-cause concepts.
For example, N.Y. Penal Law §125.25(3), p. 468 supra, provides that a person is guilty of murder if, “in the course of and in furtherance of [designated felonies] he, or another participant . . . causes the death of a person other than one of the par-
ticipants.” Several other states follow the New York model. E.g., Conn. Gen. Stat. §53A-54(c) (2021).

QUESTIONS: Does the New York statute’s “in-furtherance” requirement signify the adoption of the agency approach, or does the “he . . . causes” language require adoption of the proximate-cause theory? The New York Court of Appeals chose
the latter interpretation and upheld a felony-murder conviction where a policeman was fatally shot by a fellow officer in the course of a gun battle with several armed robbers. See People v. Hernandez, 624 N.E.2d 661 (N.Y. 1993). Do you agree?
What considerations should a court bring to bear in seeking to resolve this issue of statutory interpretation?

The New Jersey legislature amended its homicide statute several times in response to the problem illustrated by Canola. The current language provides that defendants are guilty of murder whenever they commit or attempt to commit
a designated felony, and “in the course of such crime or of immediate flight therefrom, any person causes the death of a person other than one of the participants . ..” N.J. Stat. §2C:11-3(a)(8) (2021) (emphasis added). The statute, like that of New
York, affords an affirmative defense for people who can show they had no reason to anticipate the use of deadly force in the commission of the felony. The New Jersey Supreme Court held that this statute was intended to adopt Justice Sullivan's
concurring position in Canola: a proximate-cause approach, with an exception precluding liability when the victim is a co-felon. State v. Martin, 573 A.2d 1359, 1368-1371 (N.J. 1990). Thus, although the Canola decision remains influential in guid-
ing courts outside New Jersey, the decision has been superseded by legislation in its home state.

What accounts for the tendency of some legislatures to expand the felony-murder rule by adopting the proximate-cause approach? Professor Leonard Birdsong argues that this broader approach “would better serve to deter felons
who might kill while also reaffirming the sanctity of human life, even the life of co-felons who may be killed.” Birdsong, The Felony Murder Doctrine Revisited, 33 Ohio N.U. L. Rev. 497, 499 (2007). See also People v. Hernandez, supra, 624 N.E.2d
at 665-666:

Advocates of the agency theory suggest that no culpable party has the requisite mens rea when a nonparticipant is the shooter. We disagree. . .. Whether the death is an immediate result or an attenuated one, the necessary

mens rea is present if the causal act is part of the felonious conduct.

p.562
p. 568

No more persuasive is the argument that the proximate cause view will extend criminal liability unreasonably. First, New York law is clear that felony murder . . . is limited to those deaths caused by one of the felons in

furtherance of their crime. .. . Second, the New York felony-murder statute spells out the affirmative defense available to the accomplice who does not cause the death. . . . In short, our established [rules] provide adequate

boundaries to felony-murder liability.

2. Implied malice. When the lethal act of a non-participant in the felony occurs during a highly dangerous felony, the people committing the felony arguably could be held liable for murder, without resort to the felony-murder rule,
under an “implied malice” or “depraved heart” theory, on the ground that their felonious actions were taken with a conscious disregard for life. The MPC apparently supports this view. The Commentary to its causation provision, §2.03, provides the
following example: “[I]f one of the participants in a robbery shoots at a policeman with intent to kill and provokes a return of fire by that officer that kills a bystander . . . the robber who initiates the gunfire could be charged with purposeful murder.”
Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Part I, at 263 (1985). Some courts have reached the same conclusion. For example, California has adopted the agency approach to killings by persons acting in opposition to the felony; accordingly, the
felony-murder rule is not available to convict A of murder when A is committing armed robbery and the victim of the robbery kills B, who is A’s accomplice in the robbery. But in People v. Gilbert, 408 P.2d 365, 373 (Cal. 1966), the court explained
that people who commit a felony that results in one of their accomplices being killed sometimes can be held for murder without relying on the felony-murder rule:

When the defendant or his accomplice, with a conscious disregard for life, intentionally commits an act that is likely to cause death, and his victim or a police officer kills in reasonable response to such act, . .. the killing is

attributable, not merely to the commission of a felony, but to the intentional act of the defendant or his accomplice committed with conscious disregard for life.

QUESTIONS: (a) Procedurally, what difference (if any) is there between the results obtainable under this “implied malice” theory and those obtainable under the felony-murder rule? Was the court inconsistent in rejecting the proximate-cause
theory for felony murder but adopting it for implied-malice murder?
(b) What facts should sutfice to convict for murder on the “implied malice” theory, without resort to the felony-murder rule? Presumably, a robber who opens fire on his victim would exhibit conscious disregard for life, and the victim's decision to
shoot back would be a foreseeable response. Should a court reach the same result if the robber simply points a gun at the victim, without firing? See People v. Antick, 539 P.2d 43 (Cal. 1975); Taylor v. Superior Ct., 477 P.2d 131 (Cal. 1970). What
if the robber simply says “your money or your life” without displaying a weapon at all?
Consider People v. Johnson, 221 Cal. App. 4th 623 (2013). Defendant devised a plan under which well-armed participants would force their way into a stash house
p. 569
p. 564
and take marijuana from dealers who were guarding it there. Defendant was not present when the plan was executed; one of the intended victims opened fire and killed one of the participants in the stash house robbery. The court upheld defen-
dant's conviction for first-degree murder, finding murder on an implied-malice theory and raising the offense to first-degree murder because the murder occurred in the perpetration of a robbery (id. at 632):
[Alppeliant was the “mastermind”. . .. He planned, directed, and supervised this crime. . . . Allowing a “mastermind” to escape liability for murder while his provocateur accomplice . . . suffers a first degree murder conviction
would be inconsistent and unfair. It could also encourage a criminal planner to employ accomplices to do his bidding in his absence to shield himself from the application of the provocative act murder doctrine.
QUESTIONS: Is the result sound? If so, how does this “implied malice” approach differ from holding people liable for their accomplice’s deaths under the felony-murder rule?
3. Whois killed? A number of felony-murder statutes specifically exclude killings of participants in the felony. E.g., Colo. Rev. Stat. §18-3-102 (2021); N.Y. Penal Law §125.25(3), p. 468 supra. Some courts adopt this position even in
the absence of specific statutory language requiring it. See Annot., 89 A.L.R.4th 683 (2021). What is the appeal of this distinction? Consider these possibilities:
(a) Justifiable homicide? Suppose a person committing a felony is justifiably killed by a police officer. Is that a reason for not applying the felony-murder rule to a surviving confederate? The following argument was advanced in the
Redline case, discussed in Canola:
[O]ne of the robbers . . . while resisting apprehension . .. was shot and killed by a policeman in the performance of his duty. . .. How can anyone, no matter how much of an outlaw he may be, have a criminal charge lodged
against him for the consequences of the lawful conduct of another person?
How cogent is the reasoning? Suppose two people (4 and B) who just committed a felony are holed up in a house and engaged in a gun battle with police officers surrounding the house. A tells B to run out the back door where, A says,
the coast is clear. A says this, wanting B dead and knowing that the police have the back door well covered. B dashes out, gun in hand, and is shot dead by police. Is it self-evident that 4 is not criminally liable for the police officer's killing of B?
(b) Protecting the innocent? Another argument for exempting the death of a confederate in the felony was stated as follows (State v. Williams, 254 So. 2d 548, 550-551 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1971)):
[T)he statute is primarily designed to protect the innocent public; and it would be incongruous to [place] the perpetrators themselves beneath its mantle. . . . This does not mean . . . that co-conspirators acting in furtherance
of their conspiracy . . . can kill or murder each other with impunity. . . . Certainly, one conspirator may be guilty of the murder of a co-conspirator if the facts support premeditated murder or a lesser degree
p.564
p. 565
of unlawful homicide. But this is quite apart from the felony-murder concept. . . .

Compare State v. Perez, 382 So. 2d 731 (Fla. Dist. Ct. App. 1980), overruling Williams on the ground that Florida's felony-murder statute did not expressly limit the rule to “innocent” victims. But as a matter of policy, should a felony-
murder rule be so limited? Consider United States v. Martinez, 16 F.3d 202 (7th Cir. 1994). Martinez, along with Mahn and Mares, planned to bomb adult bookstores whose owners had refused to pay them “protection” money. Mares built six pipe
bombs that could be detonated by remote-control. He and Mahn then drove through downtown Chicago, placed one of the bombs and headed for a second destination along one of Chicago's main streets, “traversing an area dense with electro-
magnetic signals” (id. at 208). One of the bombs exploded, killing Mares. The court held that Martinez and Mahn could be sentenced for felony murder based on Mares’s death. Judge Richard Posner wrote for the court (id. at 207):

The lives of criminals are not completely worthless, so their deaths should not be considered nonevents for sentencing purposes. [W]e add that liability for felony murder in a case such as the present serves the practical

function of deterring felons from using lethal weaponry, more broadly from committing the kind of felony in which someone is likely to be shot or run down or otherwise injured (and hence possibly killed), by punishing them

severely should death result — to anyone.

QUESTIONS: Would you reach the same result? Is this approach respectful of the humanity of all people, even those who commit crimes? Is it likely to add significantly to the deterrent effect of homicide sanctions? Or does it unduly extend the
reach and severity of the penal system, adding to the population of those held in long-term incarceration without adding to public safety?

‘a. Except where done in the course of a legal abortion or by a physician pursuant to a medical judgment or where consented to by the mother. Section 187(b). The language was added following Keeler v. Superior Court, p. 207 supra, 1970 Cal. Laws ch. 1311, §1. In People v. Davis, 872 P.2d 591
(Cal. 1994), the court held that viability is not an element ofthe offense of fetal murder; the killing ofa fetus can constitute murder, within the meaning of §187(a), as long as the state can show that the fetus had progressed beyond the embryonic stage of seven to eight weeks. — EDs.

’b, The court held that the statutory provisions defining murder are not preempted by the more specific provisions applicable to vehicular homicides, because greater culpability is required for the former. Thus, second-degree murder may be charged when the facts surrounding a vehicular homi-
cide support a finding of implied malice; vehicular manstaughter would be the appropriate charge when the facts demonstrate only gross negligence. — EDs.

4, Defined similarly to Model Penal Code §2.02(2)(d). — EDs.

», Defined similarly to Model Penal Code §2.02(2(c). — EDs.

©. Defined similarly to “purposely” in Model Penal Code §2.02(2\(a). — EDs.

d, The New York Court of Appeals invalidated Its capital punishment statute, People v. LaValle, 3 N.Y.Sd 88, 817 N.E.2d 941 (2004), and to date legislative attempts to enact another have falled, — EDs.

a, httos/Avwylegislationline.orq/download/id/8662/flle/Sweden criminal code_am2020 en.paf. — EDS.

2, When pressed on cross-examination defendant approximated that five minutes elapsed between his wife's last remark and the shooting.

1, A further refinement adopted in Pennsylvania in 1976 produced three degrees of murder. See the current statute at p. 465 supra. — Eps.

ails this an accurate generalization? See Note 1(b) following this case. — Eps.

11, See Office of the [W. Va] Attorney General, Annual Report to the Governor, Senate President and House of Delegates Speaker, Nov. 1, 2020, at 25, https://ago,wv.qov/publicresources/Documents/2020GR.paf.

2 See Suzanne Mounts, Premeditation and Deliberation in California: Retuming to a Distinction Without a Difference, 36 U.S. L. Rev. 261 (2002).

3, See p. 493, Note 6, infra.

4, See p. 494, Note 1, infra.

1. For another prominent example of that claim, see Donna K. Coker, Heat of Passion and Wife Kiling: Men Who Batter/Men Who Kill, 2 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Women’s Stud. 71 (1992). — Eos,

266, Aya Gruber, Murder, Minority Victims, and Mercy, 85 U. Colo. L. Rev. 129, 185 (2014).

‘Endorsing this approach, Parliament in 2009 modified the standard for mitigation to require that a defendant show that his loss of control was the result of “a justifiable sense of being seriously wronged.” Coroners and Justice Act 2009, c. 25, Part 2, ch. 1 §56(4)(b). — EDs.

4, Md, Code, art. 27, §387A (1997), currently codified at Md. Crim. Code Ann. §2-207(6) (2016).

‘5, Coroners and Justice Act 2009, supra, §55(6)(c).

6. Compare State v. Stewart, 624 N.W.2d 585, 589-590 (Minn. 2001). On facts similar to those in Spurlin, the court concluded that heat-of passion could be transferred “from a provocateur to a victim who is not a provocateur.” But the Stewart court reached that conclusion under a statute that, like
the Model Penal Code (see pp. 496-497 infra), permits mitigation on broader grounds than those accepted under traditional common-law tests

7. Likewise, the U.K. Coroners and Justice Act of 2009, §55(6)(a), would now preclude the defense when the defendant incited the victim's provocative behavior “for the purpose of providing an excuse to use violence.”

2, We emphasize that this test is to be applied to determine whether defendant's emotional disturbance, and not the act of killing, was supported by a reasonable explanation or excuse.

3, Stuart M. Kirschner et al., The Defense of Extreme Emotional Disturbance: A Qualitative Analysis of Cases in New York County, 10 Psychol. Pub. Pol'y & L. 102, 126 (2004)

8. In a somewhat different context (the issue was the relevance of past abuse, not the admissibility of expert “syndrome” testimony), another panel of the N.J. Appellate Division disagreed with the analysis in McClain and held that the victim's past abuse of the defendant should be considered
because the prior events arguably “had accumulated a detonating force which caused [defendant] to explode.” State v. Vigilante, 608 A.2d 425, 430 (N.J. Super. Ct. App. Div. 1992). Under this standard, then, the jury apparently is required to consider the reaction of a “reasonable” person who had experi-
enced those prior abuses.

5, Coroners and Justice Act 2008, c. 25, Part 2, ch. 1 §55(4)(b).

2.16, §54(1)(0),

+12, We note that both criminal negligence and recklessness require that the actor's conduct involve a “gross deviation” from the standard of care that a reasonable person would exercise under the circumstances in each case. Thus, the same risk wil suffice for elther criminally negligent or reck-
less conduct. However, the standards are sufficiently distinct to justify unequal penalties because in the case of reckless conduct the actor must be aware of the risk he creates, while criminally negligent conduct requires only that he failed to perceive the risk.

10, Colo, Rev. Stat. §§18-3-105, 18-1.5-401(V)A) (2011).

1 Defendants each received suspended sentences of three years Imprisonment. Paul Robinson, Would You Convict? Seventeen Cases That Challenged the Law 142 (1999). — Eos.

110. H. Rep. No. 95-608, 95th Cong., 2d. Sess. (1978), 1978 U.S. Code Cong, & Admin. News 7530, 1978 CIS H443-55.

111, The court explained (i. at 855 n.1):

Members of the Church “believe that disease is a physical manifestation of errors of the mind.” The use of medicine is believed to perpetuate such error and is therefore discouraged. Nonetheless, “the Church sets up no abstract criteria for determining what diseases or injuries should

be treated by prayer or other methods but, rather, leaves such questions to individual decision in concrete instances... .. If some tum in what they think is an urgent time of need to medical treatment for themselves or their children, they are not — contrary to some recent charges —

stigmatized by their church.” (Talbot, The Position of the Christian Science Church 26 New Eng. J. Med. 1641, 1642 (1983); ttalis in original)

112, See Dirk Johnson, Trials for Parents Who Choose Faith over Medicine, N.Y. Times, Jan. 21, 2009.

113, See Prince v. Massachusetts, $21 U.S. 158, 170 (1944): “Parents may be free to become martyrs themselves. But it does not follow they are free, in identical circumstances, to make martyrs of their children before they the children) have reached the age of full and legal discretion when they
‘can make that choice for themselves.”

+14, For example, the church explained in a press release regarding vaccines for COVID-19 that “Church members are free to make their own choices on all ife-decisions, in obedience to the law, including whether or not to vaccinate thelr children.” A Christian Science Perspective on Vaccination
‘and Public Health, avallable at htps:/wunw.christianscience.com/press-room/a-chrstian-science-perspective-on-vaccination-and-public-health,

1, The Pennsylvania homicide statute in effect at the time divided murder into two degrees, in accordance with the formula adopted in 1794. After classifying certain especially heinous murders as murders of the first degree, the statute provided simply that “(alll other kinds of murder shall be
murder in the second degree.” Comparable statutory language continues to define second-degree murder in many jurisdictions and what is now called “third-degree murder” in Pennsylvania. See 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. §2502(c), p. 466 supra. — EDS.

1 Ithas been explained that “Russian Poker” is a game in which the participants, in tum, place a single cartridge in one of the five chambers of a revolver cylinder, give the latter a quick twirl, place a muzzle of the gun against the temple and pull the trigger, leaving It to chance whether or not death
results to the trigger puller.

4, 18 U.S.C. §1111 (@) provides: “Murder is the unlawful killing of a human being with malice aforethought. Every murder perpetrated by poison, lying n wat, or any other kind of wilful, deliberate, malicious, and premeditated king; or committed in the perpetration of [designated felonies] is murder
in the first degree. Any other murder is murder in the second degree.” — EDs.

3. [Elven assuming that subjective awareness of the risk is required to establish murder where the killing resulted from reckless conduct, an exception to [that] requirement... is made where lack of such awareness is attributable solely to voluntary drunkenness. See, ¢.g., Model Penal Code
§§2.08(2) (‘When recklessness establishes an element of the offense, ifthe actor, due to self-induced intoxication, is unaware of a risk of which he would have been aware head he been sober, such unawareness is immaterial”) Defendant's state of voluntary intoxication thus would not have been relevant to
Whether the jury could have inferred from the circumstances ... that he was aware of the risk created by his conduct.

a Edward Coke, Institutes 56 (1644): “i the act be unlawful it is murder. As if A meaning to steale a deer in the park of B, shooteth at the deer, and by the glance of the arrow killeth a boy that is hidden in a bush; this is murder, for that the act was unlawful, although A had no intent to hurt the boy,
nor knew not of him. But if B the owner ofthe park has shot at his own deer, and without any ill intent had killed the boy by the glance of his arrow, this had been homicide by misadventure, and no felony. So if one shoot at any wild fowle upon a tree, and the arrow kileth any reasonable creature afar off, with-
‘out any evil intent in him, this is per infortunium: for it was not unlawful to shoot at the wilde fowle: but if he had shot at a cock or hen, or any tame fowle of another mans, and the arrow by mischance had killed a man, this had been murder, for the act was unlawful.” — EDs.

95, 0. Holmes, The Common Law 49 (1881).

Ina footnote at this point the MPC Comment reports on a Philadelphia study showing that, out of 6,482 robberies, just 38 were fatal; out of 1,113 rapes, just 4 were fatal; and out of 27,669 burglaries, just one was fatal. Although the relatively low numbers arguably understate the fatalty risk from
these felonies, another objection to this argument accepts the validity of the data but draws a different conclusion. Professor Kevin Cole observes (Killings During Crime, 28 Am. Crim. L. Rev. 73, 105 (1990):

[Only about 0.6 percent of all armed robberies end in death. But just because this rate is lower than we might have thought does not mean that robberies are safe relative to the normal range of human activites. ... If the average robbery takes an hour (probably an [overjestimate), that

means one homicide occurs every 166 hours of robbery. If everyday activities were as dangerous as robbery, and if the average person is awake 16 hours a day, then the average person would kill one person every eleven days. — EDS.

15. E.g,, Haw. Rev. Stat. §707-701 (2021); Ky. Rev. Stat. §507.020 (2021).

‘a. On remand, the defendant was again convicted of second-degree murder. This time the prosecution’s theory was that malice was established by the defendant's conscious disregard of the risk to the child's life. — EDs.

‘1. [The trial court] sentenced Hines to life imprisonment for felony murder...

a, The hunting offense for which Hines was acquitted is defined as follows:

‘Any person who while hunting wildlife uses a firearm or archery tackle in a manner to endanger the bodily safety of another person by consciously disregarding a substantial and unjustifiable risk that his act or omission will cause harm to or endanger the safety of another person . .. Is

gulity of a misdemeanor, provided, however, if such conduct results in serious bodily harm [the offense is a felony punishable by imprisonment] for not less than one nor more than ten years. .

Ga. Code Ann, §16-11-108 (2016). — EDs.

116. One complication Is that in some jurisdictions, the element of conscious awareness required for “recklessness” is modified when a defendant is voluntarily intoxicated. See p. 529 n.3, supra.

17. See, eg,, State v. Simino, 397 S.W.3d 11 (Mo. Ct. App. 2013); Barnett v. State, 263 P.Sd 959 (Okla. Crim. App. 2011). Cr. State v. Spruiell, 798 S.E.2d 602, 811 (N.C. Ct. App. 2017) (noting that North Carolina accepts only “a very limited ‘merger doctrine” and precludes the use of assault as a
predicate felony only in limited circumstances).

18. A similar issue arises when an enumerated felony like burglary is not committed in an inherently dangerous way. Modern definitions of burglary often extend the offense to situations involving actors who don’t “break and enter” but instead enter a home with permission, intending to commit a
nonviolent felony — for example, defrauding the owner by making a misleading sales pitch. If the victim of the fraud dies of a heart attack as a result, is the perpetrator of the fraud guilty of first-degree murder? Of course, the actor, having entered with intent to perpetrate a fraud, is guilty of burglary under such
a statute, But should it follow, just because burglary is an enumerated felony, that the inherently-dangerous-felony requirement (p. 545 supra) is inapplicable?

19. People v. Sears, 2 Cal. 3d 180, 189 (1970) (opinion of Peters, C.J.). Sears holds that the burglary merges in these circumstances.

20, Several other jurisdictions similarly hold that enumerated felonies never merge. E.g., State v. Sturdivant, 94 So. Sd 434, 440 (Fla. 2012).

2. The classic statement of the theory is found in. .. Commonwealth v. Campbell, 89 Mass. (7 Allen) 541, 544 (Sup. Jud. Ct. 1863), as follows: “No person can be held guilty of homicide unless the act is either actually or constructively his, and it cannot be his act in either sense unless committed
by his own hand or by someone acting in concert with him or in furtherance of a common object or purpose.”

a. The statute in effect at the time of Canola provided: “If any person, in committing or attempting to commit [enumerated felonies}, of which the probable consequences may be bloodshed, kills another, or if the death of anyone ensues from the committing or attempting to commit any such
crime; ... then such person so killing Is guilty of murder.” (Emphasis added.) — Eps.

21, See Comer v. State, 977 A.2d 334, 341 (Del. 2009); Annot., 89 A.L.R.4th 683 (2010).

22, See, e.g., People v. Nash, 972 N.E.2d 224, 234 (2012); State v. Jackson, 697 S.E.2d 757 (2010). For a survey of this aspect of felony-murder law, see Michelle S. Simon, Whose Crime Is It Anyway?: Liability for the Lethal Acts of Nonparticipants in the Felony, 71 U. Det. Mercy L. Rev. 223, 260
(1994).

p. 565
