p.a77
CHAPTER 4
RAPE

Few areas of substantive criminal law have attracted as much attention and controversy over the past three decades as the law of rape. Widespread criticism that rape law was unfair to women led to extensive changes in the definition
of rape, in the rules of evidence affecting rape trials, and in the processing of rape complaints.

Is rape law now in accord with prevailing attitudes about the expression of consent in sexual contacts? What are those attitudes and do they differ by gender, sexual identity, sexual orientation, or other variables? Has the focus on male
sexual abuse of women obscured the gravity of same-sex sexual violence and the sexual victimization of men? Has the law paid sufficient attention to transgender individuals? If prevalent social attitudes remain unfair, should the criminal law move
beyond them?

Issues analogous to these rarely present any difficulty in connection with crimes like homicide, burglary, and theft. But in connection with rape, these questions are acutely controversial. Also, the issues have affected many students
personally. The material can be distressing for many students to read and discuss. Professor Jeannie Suk Gerson observes that “asking students to challenge each other in discussions of rape law has become . . . difficult. [But] now more than
ever, it is critical that law students develop the ability to engage productively and analytically in conversations about sexual assault. .. . If the topic of sexual assault were to leave the law-school classroom, it would be a tremendous loss — above
all to victims of sexual assault.”! This chapter acknowledges the sensitivity of this topic as well as the importance of seeing its complexities and sharpening the professional tools available to lawyers seeking to address them.

An understanding of the legal issues requires attention to the nature of the targeted behavior and the social dynamics underlying it. We begin by considering material on the social and behavioral aspects of rape. We then examine the
legal doctrines relevant to actus reus, mens rea, and problems of proof.

p.a77
p.378
A. PERSPECTIVES
RHEA KARUTURI, RAPE ANXIETY, STANFORD DAILY, MAY 4, 2017: 2 [W]hen my friend was walking back from her car last week — it was parked just . .. across the street — she called me so she could have someone on the phone while she walked
by herself. [W]hen I was walking back to my room from a friend’s dinner — quite literally a five-minute walk — | realized that | was alone and it was dark and my shortcut was too secluded, so | took out my phone so my friends could track me while
| walked.

What I'm talking about has a technical name: It’s rape anxiety. It's the anxiety, the mundane, common anxiety — when you're walking, when you're going somewhere new, whatever — that there is a danger you could get raped. But
more simply, what it feels like is fear. It feels like not being comfortable walking back to your own dorm, . . . and it feels like looking over your shoulder because it’s after 8 p.m. | keep telling myself that I'm overreacting, that really, the chances are
so slim — but then I'm alone and walking to [the dorm], and everything looks sinister in the orange street lights. It's almost comical, except it’s not at all.

[This] general feeling of fear [means] having to weigh the chance that you won't be safe when deciding if you want to go to a meeting across campus at 9:30 p.m. [My friends] all knew the feeling — all feel it more often than would seem
rational. . . . It's not fair that we need to be afraid, that we have to always be so anxious. That this is just another thing that is a part of being a woman. . . . It’s hard to capture and even harder to explain if the listener hasn't experienced it.
AMANDA TAUB, RAPE CULTURE ISN'T A MYTH. IT’S REAL, AND IT’S DANGEROUS, VOX, DEC. 15,2014: 5 Rape culture pressures women to sacrifice their freedoms and opportunities in order to stay safe, because it puts the burden of safety on
women’s shoulders, and blames them when they don’t succeed. As a result, certain opportunities are left unavailable to women. . . . Those who don’t [stay within the safe boundaries] are held responsible for their own fate. ..

MELISSA McEWAN, RAPE CULTURE 101, SHAKESVILLE, OCT. 9, 2009: 4 Rape culture is the way in which the constant threat of sexual assault affects women's daily movements. Rape culture is telling girls and women to be careful about what you
wear, . .. where you walk, when you walk there, .. . whom you trust, . .. how much you drink, . . . to always be alert always pay attention always watch your back always be aware of your surroundings and never let your guard down for a moment
lest you be sexually assaulted and if you are and didn’t follow all the rules it’s your fault. ...

[Rapists] rape people who are strong and people who are weak, . . . people who fight back and people who submit just to get it over with... . Rape culture is the pervasive narrative that there is a “typical” way to behave after being
raped, instead of the acknowledgment that responses to rape are as varied as its victims, . . . some women go into shock; some are lucid; some are angry; some are ashamed; some are stoic; some are erratic; some want to report it; some
don't; .. . some will have healthy sex lives; some never will again.

p.s78

p.379
LIZ GORMAN, WALKING WHILE FEMALE: A STORY OF SEXUAL ASSAULT IN BROAD DAYLIGHT, JEZEBEL, JULY 13,2012: © While walking down a city street alone, [a] 10-5 rule exists. No matter the time of day or what you're wearing. It goes like this:
| am walking alone and see a man walking towards me at 10 feet. Maybe instead of looking straight ahead into the distance, | move my eyes to the ground. I slump my shoulders slightly, so maybe my breasts aren't as prominent. | begin to analyze
the width of the sidewalk; am | too close to him? | can’t move too far away, as I might risk offending him. And if I'm too close, well, that may very well be an invitation for something. At 5 feet, I take a small breath and one of two things happens:
nothing at all, which I consider a small victory or [s]omething like a kissing sound or a variety of sexually explicit comments. At which point [I'm] left with two options: pretend that | don’t hear a damn thing, or risk an additional conversation, . ..
anything from a choice silent hand gesture and specific curse words to an extended conversation on mutual respect and common courtesy. It’s usually the curse words, which | wouldn't recommend for those who can’t take what they dish. And
the encounter is over. Have a nice day.

[M)ost of us have to deal with this on a daily basis. We change our routes. Maybe I'll take a left down this street so | don’t have to walk past That Store or That Bus Stop or That House. Maybe I'll just take a cab when walking wouldn't
take much longer. . .. There are a lot of “maybes”. ...

| was in [a busy downtown area] at 3:30 p.m. yesterday and was sexually assaulted while walking. [In] a nice neighborhood, in broad daylight, in public. I'm a city girl; | walk fast and have rules. A man pulled up behind me on his bicycle
and reached up my skirt. He put his finger into [me] through my underwear. He laughed and biked away. That was it. No 10-5, no catcall. No exchange. | didn’t see his face. At least when I was robbed at gunpoint | knew who to look for on the
street.

The cops came within minutes and were exceedingly supportive. | went on with my day. . . .| received many messages of support. . . . But one thing that has bothered me is referring to what | did as “brave.” | was simply walking while
female. | guess | didn’t realize what a battle it still is out there and how much work we still have to do.

LINDA HIRSHMAN, RECKONING ix (2019): Tanya Harrell was just doing her job at a New Orleans McDonalds in 2017 when a guy she worked with shoved her into the bathroom, locked the door, and tried to rape her. The only thing the twenty-
year-old could do was cry and cry — “until he heard the manager calling [for us and] finally let me go.” Harrell wasn’t going to get any help, she knew, because the last time she'd complained that a coworker had harassed her, her shift manager . .
suggested the touching was consensual. Sure enough, when she told the new manager about the attempted rape, the boss treated her story like it was nothing. Harrell, who had left high school so she could work to pay for the medicine her grand-
mother needed, could not leave her low-wage job.

ALANA SEMUELS, LOW-WAGE WORKERS AREN'T GETTING JUSTICE FOR SEXUAL HARASSMENT, THE ATLANTIC, DEC. 27, 2017: & [There is a sobering truth often lost in the #MeToo movement — the push for accountability has class dimen-
sions. . . . Virtually all of the men who have been publicly excoriated

p.379

360
for their conduct have worked in industries like Hollywood, or politics, or law. [But s]exual harassment [which ranges from crude language and unwelcome attention to sexual demands backed by veiled threats, groping, and forcible rape] happens
just as frequently — if not more frequently — in industries dominated by low-wage workers. . .. Men in these industries tend not to be held accountable because the housekeepers and food servers they harass fear being retaliated against and los-
ing their much-needed paychecks if they bring complaints. [NJearly three-quarters of sexual-harassment victims say they're retaliated against once they file a complaint.

Proving that harassment occurred can also be challenging. .. . “If you're poor, [one advocate said,] you may be found less credible when you tell your story.” ..

In some industries, such as domestic work, employees [often are] working as an independent contractor. . . . Title VII of the Civil Rights Act, which .. . can be a tool for women who experience sexual harassment at work, does not
cover... independent contractors [so] for many women, it's off the table. [Moreover,] women who work low-wage jobs can rarely afford lawyers, and . . . because low-wage workers make so little money, the potential judgment, even if they win,
may not be enough to make it worth lawyers’ time.

NOTES

1. The debate about rape culture. Do the claims in the readings above about the prevalence of a rape culture in America strike you as accurate? If so, what are the implications for criminal law? Critics question rape-culture arguments
from several directions.

(a) Some critics challenge head-on the claim that American culture pervasively tolerates or condones rape. Caroline Kitchens, writing in Time magazine, says, “Rape is a horrific crime, and rapists are despised. . . . Though rape is cer-
tainly a serious problem, there’s no evidence that it's considered a cultural norm.”2

If Kitchens is right that “rapists are despised,” does that mean that rape-culture claims are simply wrong? Or are the two sides of this debate using the same label “rape” for two different things? Is it possible that the rapes referenced
by Kitchens are horrific, widely condemned, and rare, while much of society views the rapes referenced by Taub, McEwan, and Gorman as “no big deal” and fairly frequent. Recall that Hirshman recounts an incident of attempted forcible rape that
the victim's supervisor thought of as “nothing.”

Note how this cultural issue matters for the criminal law. The statement that rape is “a horrific crime” is not just a descriptive claim; it has strong policy implications: If “rapists are despised,” what would have to be the required elements
of the offense? What behavior would jurors consider necessary to warrant conviction?

(b) Other critics of the rape-culture claim, including many victim advocates, do not question its descriptive accuracy but worry about its consequences for prevention and reform. RAINN (the Rape, Abuse & Incest National Network), a

360
p36
leading organization working on behalf of victims of sexual violence, expresses concer that focusing on rape culture has “the paradoxical effect” of seeming to mitigate the personal responsibility of the individual abuser.®

If anti-rape activists can make their claims about rape culture convincing for a broad public, will that success make it more difficult to persuade jurors that a particular defendant acted unreasonably when (for example) being sexually
aggressive on a date? Alternatively, is focusing exclusively on the personal responsibility of a particular individual insufficient and misleading when abusive behavior has systemic foundations?

If rape culture is deeply embedded in American society, does that suggest that reform efforts are more urgently needed or that such efforts are preordained to be futile? And if reform is possible, what does the rape-culture perspective
suggest about the steps that can or cannot be effective? Where would reform of the criminal law fit in?

2. The frequency of rape. As the debates about rape culture make clear, there is intense disagreement about whether rape is alarmingly frequent or disturbing but rare. Understanding the frequency of rape accordingly is important,
but heavily dependent on what kind of behavior is being measured and how.

Under-reporting is a pervasive problem. In 2018, 50 percent of all violent victimizations but only 25 percent of all rapes and sexual assaults were reported to the police,2 and under-reporting rates are especially high for rapes by acquain-
tances and current or former intimate partners.12
The reported figures can be misleading for another reason: FBI statistics compiled through the end of 2011 defined as “rape,” and thus counted, only offenses involving vaginal penetration by physical force. The definition thus excluded
much behavior now considered rape in ordinary English and in the law of many states — sexual assault of a man (discussed in Note 2(b) below), all forcible anal penetration, and nonconsensual sex not involving physical force, such as the sexual
abuse of people who cannot resist because they are drugged or heavily intoxicated. Since 2013, the FBI and Department of Justice have defined as rape “[{]he penetration, no matter how slight, of the vagina or anus with any body part or object,
or oral penetration by a sex organ of another person, without the consent of the victim.”!! This definition is used solely for statistical purposes; it makes no change in the legal definition of rape, which continues to vary widely among the states. See
infra pp. 388-392.
p36
p.362
National victimization surveys use a more inclusive definition of the offense, and they avoid the problem of under-reporting to the police. For the year 2019, the Justice Department estimated that there were more than 450,000 victims of
rape or sexual assault, an annual victimization rate of 1.7 per thousand.12 Although many rapes are not reported even to survey interviewers, such surveys nonetheless provide useful benchmarks. They reveal disturbingly high levels of abuse, with
important variation across demographic groups.
(a) Among female victims. A 1998 Justice Department survey found that 15 percent of adult women had experienced one or more completed rapes in their lifetimes, and another 3 percent had been victims of attempted rape.!9 Al-
most 80 percent of these victims knew the perpetrator before the offense, and only 10 percent of the rapes were committed with a weapon.|4
Following the trend of declining victimization rates for violent crime generally during recent decades,"® the annual incidence of rape and attempted rape of females age 12 or older, as estimated in Justice Department national surveys,
declined by 64 percent between 1996 and 2005 and then remained unchanged from 2005 to 2010.1 Since 2010, the victimization rate has remained roughly the same on average, despite significant fluctuations from year to year.17 But small
sample sizes and persistent under-reporting, even to survey interviewers, make the figures difficult to interpret. Looking closely at law enforcement records, Professor Corey Rayburn Yung found that many police departments significantly under-
counted the rapes reported to them. He concluded that roughly a million “[reported] forcible vaginal rapes of female victims nationwide disappeared from the official records from 1995 to 2012,” and that rates of forcible rape may actually have
risen during this period. Yung, How to Lie with Rape Statistics: America’s Hidden Rape Crisis, 99 lowa L. Rev. 1197, 1198, 1239 (2014).
Victimization rates vary significantly across demographic groups. Women of color and poor women are at especially high risk.1° When the Justice Department analyzed demographic breakdowns in 2010 data, it estimated that among all
women over age 12, the annual rape victimization rate was 1.1 per thousand, but for college women age 18-24, the rate was 6.1 per thousand,12 and the rape victimization
p.362
p. 368
rate was even higher — 7.6 per thousand — for women of the same age who were not students.22 Looking more closely at the campus situation, a Justice Department survey of nine colleges found that during the 2014-2015 academic year, 4.1
percent of college women were victims of a completed rape! — in other words, a rate of 41 per thousand, many times greater than the 6.1 per thousand rate estimated in the 2010 study.22
The prevalence of victimization is now widely accepted, but some of the reported figures have stirred controversy. A 2009 study found that more than half of college rape victims did not label their experience as “rape.”2° That finding
raises important questions about the evolving social conception of what rape is. Does the apparent anomaly — that rape seemed to occur more frequently in the eyes of researchers than in the eyes of the college students themselves — suggest
that rape is not really as prevalent as some researchers claim? Or does it suggest that victims still assume that physically coerced sex at a party or on a date cannot be “rape”?
Notice that the stakes on this question go beyond the debate about whether rape-prevalence statistics are accurate, because public perceptions of what “rape” means play a large role in decisions by police, prosecutors, and jurors.
Has the #MeToo era raised awareness on this issue? Or do you think opinions about what counts as rape still have not caught up with definitions like the one used by the FBI?

(b) Male and LGBTQ+ victims. The focus of rape-law reform has centered on abuse of women, but many theorists and advocates suggest that the “violence against women” perspective is outdated, obscuring the victimization of men
and individuals in LGBTQ+ communities. See, e.g., |. Bennett Capers, Real Rape Too, 99 Cal. L. Rev. 1259 (2011); Julie Goldscheid, Gender Neutrality and the “Violence Against Women” Frame, 5 U. Miami Race & Soc. Just. L. Rev. 307 (2015).
Donna Coker writes (Coker, supra note 18, at 165-166) that

the meaning of gender violence [should] include violence that is intended to or results in policing gender conformity, punishing gender nonconformity, and creating racial/gender hierarchies of power... . This “integrated

approach’ to antiviolence work “understand{s] the interplay of race, sexuality, class, and gender.”

Sexual abuse of men is by no means rare. Professor Capers reports data indicating that one in 33 American men have been victims of completed or attempted rape in their lifetimes, and this is likely an underestimate. Capers, supra, at

369

964
1261-1262. The Justice Department college survey for the 2014-2015 academic year found that 0.8 percent of male students had been victims of a completed rape (compared to 4.1 percent of female students).24 Victimization rates for LGBTQ+
individuals, both in college and elsewhere, may be even higher than those for heterosexual women.2° Under-reporting is endemic, partly because these victims and their advocates confront pervasive disbelief or indifference on the part of author-
ities and the wider public.

Victimization rates are even higher for these groups in prisons. In one Justice Department survey, 4.5 percent of incarcerated people reported sexual assault during the previous year, and 13 percent had been sexually victimized (often
many times) during their time in custody.2° Incarcerated men may be targeted regardless of their sexual orientation, but gay men face especially high risks of abuse, as do trans women, who often are placed in men’s prisons, even though they
identify as women. See Gabriel Arkles, Regulating Prison Sexual Violence, 7 Ne. LJ. 69, 76 (2015). In Los Angeles County, jail administrators have sought to mitigate these risks by placing gay men and trans people in a separate unit that, as a
result, appears to be relatively free of sexual assault. Sharon Dolovich, Two Models of the Prison: Accidental Humanity and Hypermasculinity in the L.A. County Jail, 102 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 965 (2012). If this is an attractive model, how should
the jail administration decide whom to admit to the unit? Should it limit which sexual orientations qualify or require people who seek admission to the unit to openly acknowledge a particular sexual identity? See Russell K. Robinson, Masculinity as
Prison: Sexual Identity, Race, and Incarceration, 99 Cal. L. Rev. 1309 (2011).

(©) To keep the victimization estimates in perspective, it is essential to stress that even the estimates at the “low” end represent an enormous amount of abuse. But the debate over the prevalence of rape remains important for under-
standing the nature of the task that criminal law confronts: Is the law addressing serious but infrequent, aberrational behavior? Or should the law condemn (and does it already condemn) a type of conduct that is commonplace among otherwise
law-abiding people?

3. The harm of rape—and why it matters. What precisely is the nature of the wrong that a victim of rape suffers? Many think of rape as a crime of violence. On this view, some argue that the harm to a rape victim is similar to that
experienced in a severe beating. Men who view the offense in these terms often see the threat of rape faced by women as not fundamentally different from the threat of non-sexual assault to which men are often exposed. In contrast, many victim
advocates suggest that the important harm in rape is not violence but unwanted sexual intrusion. Taking this view, they argue that men often have difficulty understanding what women fear about male behavior and that these “male” attitudes lead
to

p.364
p. 385
inappropriate conceptions about the kind of force necessary to constitute rape. See Catharine A. Mackinnon, Feminism Unmodified 86-87 (1987). Other concerns have been suggested:

Intercourse with an unconscious woman is prohibited not because the act is violent (though it does have violent aspects) but more fundamentally because taking advantage of a woman's incapacitation in this manner

violates, without any conceivable justification, her right to control access to her own body. Once it is recognized that these features (rather than implicit violence) are essential to existing criminal prohibitions, sexual auton-

omy emerges as an independent value.27

[Elvery person [has a] right to control the boundaries of his or her own sexual experience. . . . The core concept of the person . . . implies a physical boundary. . . . Even without making threats that restrict the

exercise of free choice, an individual violates a woman's autonomy when he engages in sexual autonomy emerges as an independent value.22
Corey Rayburn Yung cautions against reducing the harm of rape to any single notion and explains that the harms are multidimensional (Rape Law Fundamentals, 27 Yale J.L. & Feminism 1, 20-22 (2015)):

Rape is not merely an attack on the body, but a violation of the psyche. [Rlape victims [compared to victims of ordinary assault] have substantially higher risks of physiological and psychological effects including post-

traumatic stress disorder . . ., depression, and suicide. . . . Rape victims are also stigmatized in a manner quite different than the treatment given to other crime victims. . .. Itis the higher level and distinct nature of harm, in-

cluding but not limited to the violation of autonomy, which serve as the primary basis for codifying rape as a separate crime. .. .

4, Race and racism. Deeply embedded throughout the history of rape-law enforcement is concern that race — even more dramatically in this area than in other crimes — can distort the even-handed administration of the criminal law.
When the death penalty was constitutionally permissible for rape (it no longer is22), it was frequently imposed in rape cases involving a Black defendant and a white complainant, but rarely imposed in any other racial configuration. See Susan Es-
trich, Rape, 95 Yale L.J. 1087, 1089 & n.2 (1986). We may have yet to transcend this history — Black men are still at high risk of unjust conviction and disproportionate punishment, while Black women, even more than other rape victims, often have
exceptional difficulty getting effective protection from police, prosecutors, and juries. See Angela P. Harris, Race and Essentialism in Feminist Legal Theory,

385

p. 386
42 Stan. L. Rev. 581, 598-599 (1990). Many would argue that any such discrimination calls for remedies in law-enforcement practices but should not influence the way the crime itself is defined. For others, however, the potential for discriminatory
administration of rape law must prominently affect the breadth of the offense and the kinds of prosecutions it authorizes.

5, Reasonable disagreements and “right” answers. One reason that disputes about rape law continue is that underlying attitudes about sexual relationships remain highly controversial and are constantly in flux. Criminal law always
reflects, responds to, and acts upon the culture of the community. Nowhere have these interactions become more vivid, and more problematic, than in the law of rape. Thirty years ago, Professor Susan Estrich, who had written of her experience
as a rape victim, offered a perspective on the issues that remains relevant to this day (Teaching Rape Law, 102 Yale LJ. 509, 514-515 (1992):

| know many students, and even a few professors, who believe that .... if [the woman] didn’t consent fully and voluntarily, it is rape, no matter what she said or did, or what he did or did not realize. . . . And that’s what they

want to hear in class. This kind of orthodoxy is not only bad educationally but, in the case of rape, it also misses the point. Society is not so orthodox in its views. There is a debate going on in the courthouses and prosecu-

tors’ offices, and around coffee machines and dinner tables . . . about when women should be believed, and what counts as consent. There’s a debate going on in America as to what is reasonable when it comes to sex... .

To silence that debate in the classroom is to remove the classroom from reality, and to make ourselves irrelevant. It may be hard for some students, but ultimately the only way to change things — and that’s usually the goal

of those who find the discussions most difficult — is to confront the issues squarely. . . .

B. STATUTORY FRAMEWORKS
INTRODUCTORY NOTE

In the eighteenth century, William Blackstone defined rape as “carnal knowledge of a woman forcibly and against her will.”2° Until the 1950s, most American statutes preserved Blackstone's definition, with only minor verbal differences.
This uniformity began to erode with a wave of reforms initiated in the 1960s and 1970s. Along with changes to rules of evidence (considered in Section G below), the reforms addressed such substantive issues as the gender-specific character of
the crime (traditionally, only a woman could be raped), the degree of force and/or resistance required, the need to differentiate between degrees of the offense, and the traditional exemption for men who forcibly raped their wives.

The upshot is enormous diversity in state approaches today. Many states still adhere closely to traditional conceptions; in Maryland, for example, rape is defined,

p. 386

367
in terms not much different from those of Blackstone's day, as “vaginal intercourse or a sexual act with another . . . by force, or the threat of force, without the consent of the other.” Elsewhere, many statutes combine new features with vestiges
of the older concepts, while others make a sharp break with the past. To illustrate these variations, we present the 1950 California provision, which was typical of the rape statutes of its time; the 1962 Model Penal Code approach; and four con-
trasting regimes of more recent vintage — the current statutes of California, New York, and Wisconsin, and the 2021 revision of the Model Penal Code.

For an initial overview, we suggest that students note how statutory regimes have changed over time and how states now differ in the way they label, grade, and punish the offense. In addition, note variations in the kinds of facts re-
quired to obtain a conviction. Is the legal definition of rape or sexual assault in these jurisdictions broader or narrower than the definition that the FBI uses for statistical purposes (p. 381, Note 2, supra)? We also suggest returning to these regimes,
after considering the cases that follow, to assess which statutory approach affords the best framework for resolving concrete problems.

California Penal Code, Title 9 (1950)
Section 261. Rape

Rape [punishable by imprisonment for up to 50 years] is an act of sexual intercourse accomplished with a female not the wife of the perpetrator .. .

(1) Where the female is under the age of eighteen years;

(2) Where she is incapable, through . . . unsoundness of mind . . . of giving consent;

(3) Where she resists but her resistance is overcome by force or violence;

(4) Where she is prevented from resisting by threats of great and immediate bodily harm, . . . or by any intoxicating [or] narcotic . . . substance, administered by or with the privity of the accused.

(6) Where she is at the time unconscious of the nature of the act, and this is known to the accused. . . .

(6) Where she submits under the belief that the person committing the act is the victim's spouse, and this belief is induced by any artifice, pretense, or concealment practiced by the accused, with intent to induce such belief.

Model Penal Code: Article 213. Sexual Offenses (Proposed Official Draft 1962)
Section 213.1. Rape and Related Offenses
(1) Rape. A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife is guilty of rape if:
(a) he compels her to submit by force or by threat of imminent death, serious bodily injury, extreme pain or kidnapping, to be inflicted on anyone; or
p.367
p. 368

(b) he has substantially impaired her power to appraise or control her conduct by administering or employing without her knowledge drugs, intoxicants or other means for the purpose of preventing resis-
tance; or
(c) the female is unconscious; or
(d) the female is less than 10 years old.
Rape is a felony of the second degree unless (j) in the course thereof the actor inflicts serious bodily injury upon anyone, or (i) the victim was not a voluntary social companion of the actor upon the occasion of the crime
and had not previously permitted him sexual liberties, in which cases the offense is a felony of the first degree... .
(2) Gross Sexual Imposition. A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife commits a felony of the third degree if:
(a) he compels her to submit by any threat that would prevent resistance by a woman of ordinary resolution; or
(b) he knows that she suffers from a mental disease or defect which renders her incapable of appraising the nature of her conduct; or
(c) he knows that she is unaware that a sexual act is being committed upon her or that she submits because she mistakenly supposes that he is her husband. .. .
Section 213.3. Corruption of Minors and Seduction
(1) Offense Defined. A male who has sexual intercourse with a female not his wife, or any person who engages in deviate sexual intercourse or causes another to engage in deviate sexual intercourse, is guilty of an offense
itt
(a) the other person is less than [16] years old and the actor is at least [4] years older than the other person; or
(b) the other person is less than 21 years old and the actor is his guardian or otherwise responsible for general supervision of his welfare; or
(c) the other person is in custody of law or detained in a hospital or other institution and the actor has supervisory or disciplinary authority over him; or
(d) the other person is a female who is induced to participate by a promise of marriage which the actor does not mean to perform.
(2) Grading. An offense under paragraph (a) of Subsection (1) is a felony of the third degree. Otherwise an offense under this section is a misdemeanor.
California Penal Code, Title 9 (2021)
Section 261. Rape Defined
(a) Rape [punishable by imprisonment for three, six, or eight years®] is an act of sexual intercourse accomplished with a person not the spouse of the perpetrator... :
(1) Where a person is incapable, because of a mental disorder or developmental or physical disability, of giving legal consent, and this is known or reasonably should be known to the person committing the
act...
p. 368
369
(2) Where it is accomplished against a person's will by means of force, violence, duress, menace, or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury on the person or another.
(3) Where a person is prevented from resisting by any intoxicating or anesthetic substance, . . . and this condition was known, or reasonably should have been known by the accused.
(4) Where a person is at the time unconscious of the nature of the act, and this is known to the accused. . ..

(5) Where a person submits under the belief that the person committing the act is someone known to the victim other than the accused, and this belief is induced by any artifice, pretense, or concealment
practiced by the accused, with intent to induce the belief.
(6) Where the act is accomplished against the victim's will by threatening to retaliate in the future against the victim or any other person, and there is a reasonable possibility that the perpetrator will execute
the threat. “[T]hreatening to retaliate” means a threat to kidnap or falsely imprison, or to inflict extreme pain, serious bodily injury, or death. .. .
(7) Where the act is accomplished against the victim's will by threatening to use the authority of a public official to incarcerate, arrest, or deport the victim or another, and the victim has a reasonable belief
that the perpetrator is a public official. ...
(b) “[DJuress” means a direct or implied threat of force, violence, danger, or retribution sufficient to coerce a reasonable person of ordinary susceptibilities [to] acquiesce in an act to which one otherwise would not have
submitted... .
(c) “[Mjenace” means any threat, declaration, or act which shows an intention to inflict an injury upon another.
Section 261.5. Unlawful Sexual Intercourse with a Person Under 18...
Unlawful sexual intercourse is an act of sexual intercourse accomplished with a person [under 18 years of age] who is not the spouse of the perpetrator. . . . [Imprisonment for up to four years when the minor is more than three years
younger than the perpetrator.2]
Section 261.6. “Consent.”...
In prosecutions under Section 261 [or] 262 . . . in which consent is at issue, “consent” shall be defined to mean positive cooperation in act or attitude pursuant to an exercise of free will. The person must act freely and voluntarily and
have knowledge of the nature of the act or transaction involved. . .
Section 262. Rape of a Spouse...
Rape of a person who is the spouse of the perpetrator [punishable as provided under §261] is an act of sexual intercourse accomplished under any of the . . . circumstances [specified in §261(2), (3), (4), or (6)]-
p.369
p.390
New York Penal Law (2021)
Section 130.00. Sex Offenses; Definitions of Terms...
8. “Forcible compulsion” means to compel by either: (a) use of physical force; or (b) a threat, express or implied, which places a person in fear of immediate death or physical injury to himself, herself or another person, or in fear that he,
she or another person will immediately be kidnapped.
Section 130.05. Sex Offenses; Lack of Consent
1. Whether or not specifically stated, it is an element of every offense defined in this article that the sexual act was committed without consent of the victim.
2. Lack of consent results from: (a) Forcible compulsion; or (b) Incapacity to consent; or . . . (d) Where the offense charged is rape in the third degree as defined in subdivision three of section 130.25, . . . circumstances under which, at
the time of the act of intercourse, . . . the victim clearly expressed that he or she did not consent to engage in such act, and a reasonable person in the actor's situation would have understood such person's words and acts as an expression of lack
of consent to such act under all the circumstances.

3. A person is deemed incapable of consent when he or she is: (a) less than seventeen years old; or (b) mentally disabled; . . . or (d) physically helpless; or (e) committed to the care and custody of [a state agency] . . . and the actor is an
employee who knows or reasonably should know that such person is committed to the care and custody of such [agency]; or . . . (h) a client or patient and the actor is a health care provider . . . charged with rape in the third degree as defined in
section 130.25, . .. and the act of sexual conduct occurs during a treatment session [or] consultation . . . ; or () detained or otherwise in the custody of a police officer, peace officer, or other law enforcement official and the actor is a police officer,
peace officer or other law enforcement official who either: (i) is detaining or maintaining custody of such person; or (i) knows, or reasonably should know, that at the time of the offense, such person was detained or in custody.

Section 130.20. Sexual Misconduct
[Slexual intercourse with another person without such person's consent . . . is a class A misdemeanor [one-year maximum]. . ..
Section 130.25. Rape in the Third Degree

A person is guilty of rape in the third degree [four-year maximum] when:

1. He or she engages in sexual intercourse with another person who is incapable of consent by reason of some factor other than being less than seventeen years old;

2. Being twenty-one years old or more, he or she engages in sexual intercourse with another person less than seventeen years old; or

3. He or she engages in sexual intercourse with another person without such person’s consent where such lack of consent is by reason of some factor other than incapacity to consent. .. .

Section 130.30. Rape in the Second Degree

A person is guilty of rape in the second degree [seven-year maximum] when . . . he or she engages in sexual intercourse with another person who is . . . mentally disabled [or less than fifteen years old and is more than four years younger
than the perpetrator]. . ..

p.390
p39
Section 130.35. Rape in the First Degree
A person is guilty of rape in the first degree [25-year maximum] when he or she engages in sexual intercourse with another person [bly forcible compulsion; or [when the other person is] physically helpless; or [less than] thirteen years
old...
Wisconsin Statutes (2021)
Section 940.225. Sexual Assault
(1) First degree sexual assault . . . a Class B felony [60-year maximum] [is committed whenever any person has] sexual contact or sexual intercourse with another person without consent of that person and causes preg-
nancy or great bodily harm to that person [or uses or threatens to use] a dangerous weapon. . ..
(2) Second degree sexual assault . . . a Class C felony [40-year maximum] [is committed whenever any person has sexual contact or sexual intercourse]:
(a) . . . with another person without consent of that person by use or threat of force or violence.
(b). . . with another person without consent of that person and causes injury, illness, .. . or mental anguish requiring psychiatric care for the victim.
(c)... with a person who suffers from a mental illness or deficiency which renders that person temporarily or permanently incapable of appraising the person's conduct, and the defendant knows of such
condition.

(cm) .. . with a person who is under the influence of an intoxicant to a degree which renders that person incapable of giving consent if the defendant has actual knowledge that the person is incapable of
giving consent and the defendant has the purpose to have sexual contact or sexual intercourse with the person while the person is incapable of giving consent.
(d) . .. with a person who the defendant knows is unconscious. .. .
(3) Third degree sexual assault. Whoever has sexual intercourse with a person without the consent of that person is guilty of a Class G felony [ten-year maximum]. . . .
(4) Consent . . . means words or overt actions by a person who is competent to give informed consent indicating a freely given agreement to have sexual intercourse or sexual contact. . ..
Section 948.02. Sexual Assault of a Child
. .. Whoever has sexual contact or sexual intercourse with a person who has not attained the age of 16 years is guilty of a Class C felony [40-year maximum. . .
p.391
p.392
Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses
Tentative Draft No. 5 (May 5, 2021, approved by the Membership, June 2021)¢
Section 213.1 Sexual Assault by Aggravated Physical Force or Restraint
Section 213.2 Sexual Assault by Physical Force or Restraint
Section 213.3 Sexual Assault of an Incapacitated, Vulnerable, or Legally Restricted Person
Section 213.4 Sexual Assault by Extortion
Section 213.5 Sexual Assault by Prohibited Deception
Section 213.6 Sexual Assault in the Absence of Consent...
Section 213.8 Sexual Offenses Involving Minors
[See the Appendix in this book.]
C. ACTUS REUS
Whatever may be the limits of acceptable behavior as a matter of social decency or the codes of conduct applicable on college campuses, a conviction for rape in all American jurisdictions once required proof that the defendant had
used or threatened physical force; sexual penetration without consent was a crime only under special circumstances — when the victim was below a given age (“statutory” rape), unconscious, or mentally incompetent. See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code
§261 (1950), pp. 388-389, supra; Deborah W. Denno, Sexuality, Rape, and Mental Retardation, 1997 U. Ill. L. Rev. 315.
In just over half the states, this traditional approach is still in effect today. When a complainant was not under age or incapacitated, 27 states, including California and Texas, require force — not just the absence of consent — as an essen-
tial prerequisite to a conviction for rape or other felony sexual assault.22

p.392
p. 393
Because reforms in this area are so widely discussed, and because so many significant changes have occurred, the extent of the changes is easily overestimated. From the perspective of those committed to rape-law reform, this glass
is not yet half full. Specifically, according to the most careful recent count, only 22 states punish sexual penetration as a felony on the basis of the victim’s non-consent, without requiring proof of physical force, coercion, or victim incapacity. In the
remaining states, such conduct either is a misdemeanor, in the same category as any unwanted sexual contact, or is not subject to criminal penalties at all.°3
Currently, therefore, American law has two distinct approaches to defining the actus reus of rape. In the more traditional approach, still followed in most states, proof of physical force or some roughly equivalent form of coercion is
normally required. In a sizeable minority of the states, neither force nor other coercion is required; rape or felonious sexual assault can be established on the basis of sexual penetration without consent. The next two sections examine these ap-
proaches in turn, first the current majority view requiring force or other coercion, and then the significant (and slowly growing) minority approach based on the absence of consent.
1. Force and Coercion
INTRODUCTORY NOTE
In most states, as just noted, proof that a defendant used or threatened physical force or other coercion is normally essential for conviction of rape or an equivalent felony offense (which many states now label “sexual assault”). In
addition, evidence of force remains relevant, even in states that permit conviction solely on the basis of non-consent, because the use of force can affect grading or sentencing. It is always important, therefore, to determine what “force” means in
a sexual offense. The present section examines that question, focusing on cases in which the answer determines whether the defendant is guilty of any felony offense at all.
The next example was considered a “close case” on that issue in 1981. As you read the court’s decision, consider whether the case should still be considered a “close” one on that issue today. And if you think a contemporary court
would more readily uphold the conviction under a statutory regime that requires “force,” which aspects of the defendant’s conduct are necessary to support that conclusion?
State v. Rusk
Court of Appeals of Maryland
424 A.2d 720 (1981)
Murpny, C.J. Edward Rusk was found guilty by a jury . . . of second degree rape in violation of Maryland Code Art. 27, §463(a)(1), which provides in pertinent part:
p. 393
p.394
A person is guilty of rape in the second degree if the person engages in vaginal intercourse with another person [bly force or threat of force against the will and without the consent of the other person. . . .2
On appeal, the Court of Special Appeals, sitting en banc, . .. concluded by an 8-5 majority that [there was] insufficient evidence of Rusk’s guilt . . . to permit the case to go to the jury. We granted certiorari to consider whether the Court
of Special Appeals properly applied the [law].
At the trial, the 21-year-old prosecuting witness, Pat, testified that . . . she met a girl friend, Terry, and agreed to drive in their respective cars to Fells Point to have a few drinks. . .. They went to a bar where . . . Rusk approached and
said “hello” to Terry. [Terry] said “Hi, Eddie.” Rusk then began talking with Pat and during their conversation both of them acknowledged being separated from their respective spouses and having a child. Pat told Rusk that she had to go home

[and] Rusk requested a ride to his apartment. Although Pat did not know Rusk, she thought that Terry knew him [and] agreed to give him a ride. Pat cautioned Rusk on the way to the car that “I'm just giving a ride home, you know, as a friend, not
anything to be, you know, thought of other than a ride.” ..

After a twenty-minute drive, they arrived at Rusk’s apartment. . . . Pat testified that she was totally unfamiliar with the neighborhood. She parked the car at the curb . . . but left the engine running. Rusk asked Pat to come in, but
[nJotwithstanding her repeated refusals, Pat testified that Rusk reached over and turned off the ignition to her car and took her car keys. He got out of the car, walked over to her side, opened the door and said, “Now, will you come up?” Pat ex-
plained her subsequent actions:

At that point, because | was scared, because he had my car keys. | didn’t know what to do. | was someplace I didn’t even know where | was. . . . | didn’t know whether to run. | really didn’t think at that point, what to do.

Now, | know that | should have blown the horn. I should have run. There were a million things | could have done. | was scared, at that point, and | didn’t do any of them.
Pat testified that at this moment she feared that Rusk would rape her. She said: “[ljt was the way he looked at me, and said ‘Come on up, come on up’; and when he took the keys, | knew that was wrong.”
It was then about 1 a.m. Pat accompanied Rusk across the street into a totally dark house. . . . Rusk unlocked the door to his one-room apartment, and turned on
p.394
p. 395
the light... . After Rusk talked for a few minutes, he left the room for about one to five minutes. [Pat] made no noise and did not attempt to leave. She said that she did not notice a telephone in the room. When Rusk returned, he turned off the light
and sat down on the bed. Pat .. . told him that she wanted to go home. . . . Rusk, who was still in possession of her car keys, said he wanted her to stay.

Rusk then asked Pat to get on the bed with him. He pulled her by the arms to the bed and began to undress her. . .. Pat removed the rest of her clothing, and then removed Rusk's pants because “he asked me to do it.” After they were
both undressed Rusk started kissing Pat as she was lying on her back. Pat explained what happened next:

| was still begging him to please let, you know, let me leave. | said, “you can get a lot of other girls down there, for what you want,” and he just kept saying, “no”; and then | was really scared, because | can’t describe, you

know, what was said. It was more the look in his eyes; and I said, at that point... . , “If | do what you want, will you let me go without killing me?” Because | didn’t know, at that point, what he was going to do; and I started to.

cry; and when | did, he put his hands on my throat, and started lightly to choke me; and | said, “If | do what you want, will you let me go?” And he said, yes, and at that time, | proceeded to do what he wanted me to.

Pat testified that Rusk made her perform oral sex and then vaginal intercourse. Immediately after the intercourse, Pat asked if she could leave. She testified that Rusk said, “Yes,” after which she got up and got dressed and Rusk re-
turned her car keys. She said that Rusk then

walked me to my car, and asked if he could see me again; and | said, “Yes”; and he asked me for my telephone number; and I said, “No, I'll see you down Fells Point sometime,” just so | could leave.

Pat testified that she “had no intention of meeting him again.” She asked him for directions out of the neighborhood and left. . .. As she sat in her car reflecting on the incident, Pat said she began to

wonder what would happen if | hadn't of done what he wanted me to do. So | thought the right thing to do was to go report it, and | went from there to Hillendale to find a police car.

She reported the incident to the police at about 3:15 AM. ...

[Rusk and two of his friends testified that they had gone together to a bar to “tr[y] to pick up some ladies,” and the friends testified that later in the evening they had seen Rusk walking arm-in-arm with a woman who was “hanging all
over him.” One of the friends was fairly certain that the woman was Pat.]

According to Rusk, when they arrived in front of his apartment Pat parked the car and turned the engine off. They sat for several minutes “petting each other.” ... Rusk testified that Pat came willingly to his room and that at no time did
he make threatening facial expressions. . . . Rusk explained that after the intercourse, Pat “got uptight.”

Well, she started to cry. She said that — she said, “You guys are all alike,” she says, “just out for,” you know, “one thing.” . .. And she said, that she just wanted to leave; and I said, “Well, okay”; and she walked out to the car.

| walked out to the car. She got in the car and left.

p.395
p. 396

Rusk denied placing his hands on Pat's throat or attempting to strangle her. He also denied using force or threats of force to get Pat to have intercourse with him.

In reversing Rusk’s second-degree rape conviction, the Court of Special Appeals [noted]:

Force is an essential element of the crime [of rape] and to justify a conviction, the evidence must warrant a conclusion either that the victim resisted and her resistance was overcome by force or that she was prevented from

resisting by threats to her safety... .

In all of the victim's testimony we have been unable to see any resistance on her part to the sex acts and certainly can we see no fear as would overcome her attempt to resist or escape. . . . Possession of the

keys by the accused may have deterred her vehicular escape but hardly a departure seeking help in the rooming house or in the street. We must say that “the way he looked” fails utterly to support the fear required. . .

[DJue process requirements mandate that a criminal conviction not be obtained if the evidence does not reasonably support a finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. However, . . . the reviewing court does not ask itself whether it
believes that the evidence established guilt beyond a reasonable doubt; rather, the applicable standard is “whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could have found the essential el-
ements of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.”

[Llack of consent is generally established through proof of resistance or by proof that the victim failed to resist because of fear. The degree of fear necessary to obviate the need to prove resistance, and thereby establish lack of con-
sent, . .. “includes, but is not necessarily limited to, a fear of death or serious bodily harm, or a fear so extreme as to preclude resistance, .. . or a fear that so overpowers her that she does not dare resist.”

[The] majority of jurisdictions have required that the victim's fear be reasonably grounded in order to obviate the need for either proof of actual force on the part of the assailant or physical resistance on the part of the victim. We think
that, generally, this is the correct standard. .. .

We think the reversal of Rusk’s conviction by the Court of Special Appeals was in error [because that court] substituted [its] own view of the evidence . . . for that of the judge and jury. [T]he reasonableness of Pat's apprehension of fear
was plainly a question of fact for the jury to determine. . .. Quite obviously, the jury disbelieved Rusk and believed Pat's testimony. From her testimony, the jury could have reasonably concluded that the taking of her car keys was intended by Rusk
to immobilize her alone, late at night, in a neighborhood with which she was not familiar; . .. that Pat was afraid that Rusk would kill her unless she submitted; that she began to cry and Rusk then put his hands on her throat and began “lightly to
choke” her; that Pat asked him if he would let her go without killing her if she complied with his demands; that Rusk gave an affirmative response, after which she finally submitted.

Just where persuasion ends and force begins in cases like the present is essentially a factual issue. . . . Considering all of the evidence in the case, with particular focus upon the actual force applied by Rusk to Pat's neck, we conclude
that the jury

p. 396
p.397
could rationally find that the essential elements of second-degree rape had been established and that Rusk was guilty of that offense beyond a reasonable doubt... .

Cote, J., dissenting . . . It seems to me that whether the prosecutrix’s fear is reasonable becomes a question only after the court determines that the defendant's conduct under the circumstances was reasonably calculated to give rise
to a fear on her part to the extent that she was unable to resist. .. .

While courts no longer require a female to resist to the utmost or to resist where resistance would be foolhardy, they do require her acquiescence in the act of intercourse to stem from fear generated by something of substance. She
may not simply say, “I was really scared,” and thereby transform consent or mere unwillingness into submission by force. . .. She must follow the natural instinct of every proud female to resist, by more than mere words, the violation of her person
by a stranger or an unwelcomed friend. She must make it plain that she regards such sexual acts as abhorrent and repugnant to her natural sense of pride. She must resist unless the defendant has objectively manifested his intent to use physical
force to accomplish his purpose. The law regards rape as a crime of violence. The majority today attenuates this proposition. It declares the innocence of an at best distraught young woman. It does not demonstrate the defendant's guilt of the
crime of rape.

. .. The majority suggests that “from her testimony the jury could have reasonably concluded that the taking of her keys was intended by Rusk to immobilize her alone, late at night, in a neighborhood with which she was unfamiliar. . . .”
But on what facts does the majority so conclude? There is no evidence descriptive of the tone of his voice; her testimony indicates only the bare statement quoted above. . . .

She also testified that she was afraid of “the way he looked”. . . . But what can the majority conclude from [a] “look” that remained undescribed? There is no evidence whatsoever to suggest that this was anything other than a pattern of
conduct consistent with the ordinary seduction of a female acquaintance who at first suggests her disinclination. . . .

The majority further suggests that the jury could infer the defendant's affirmative response [to her question “If | do what you want, will you let me go without killing me?”]. The facts belie such inference since by the prosecutrix's own
testimony the defendant made no response. He said nothing!

She then testified that she started to cry and he “started lightly to choke” her, whatever that means. Obviously, the choking was not of any persuasive significance. During this “choking” she was able to talk. She said “If | do what you
want will you let me go?” It was at this point that the defendant said yes.

I find it incredible for the majority to conclude that on these facts, without more, a woman was forced to commit oral sex upon the defendant and then to engage in vaginal intercourse. [T]here are no acts or conduct on the part of the
defendant to suggest . . . that he made any objective, identifiable threats to her which would give rise to this woman's failure to flee, summon help, scream, or make physical resistance. . . . In my judgment the State failed to prove the essential el-
‘ement of force beyond a reasonable doubt... .

p.397
p. 398
NOTES ON FORCE AND RESISTANCE

1. The Rusk facts. The narrowly divided Rusk court upheld the defendant's conviction only by emphasizing “the actual force applied by Rusk to Pat's neck.” Consider Susan Estrich, Rape, 95 Yale L.J. 1087, 1114-1115 (1986):

The [Rusk court's] emphasis on the light choking/heavy caresses is, perhaps, understandable. . . . As it happens, however, that force was not applied until the two were already undressed and in bed. Whatever it was —

choking or caressing — was a response to the woman's crying as the moment of intercourse approached. It was not, it seems fairly clear, the only force that produced that moment.

What other sorts of force were present? And what concerns might have led the court’s majority to consider that force insufficient to meet the statutory requirement? For a probing examination of the Rusk prosecution and its contemporary signifi-
cance, see Jeannie Suk, “The Look in His Eyes”: The Story of State v. Rusk and Rape Reform, in Criminal Law Stories (Robert Weisberg & Donna Coker eds., 2011).

2. What “force” means. In jurisdictions where a rape conviction requires proof of force or a threat of force, courts typically insist that it must go “beyond that which is inherent or incidental to the sexual act itself.” State v. Jones, 299
P.3d 219, 228 (Idaho 2013); it means “physical compulsion, or a threat of physical compulsion, that causes the victim to submit to the sexual penetration against his or her will.” People v. Denbo, 868 N.E.2d 347, 356 (Ill. App. Ct. 2007). See, e.g.,
Commonwealth v. Lopez, 745 N.E.2d 961, 965 (Mass. 2001):

We have construed the [statutory] element, “by force and against his will,” as truly encompassing two separate elements each of which must independently be satisfied. Therefore, the Commonwealth must demonstrate

beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant committed sexual intercourse (1) by means of physical force; nonphysical, constructive force [such as a police officer's threat to arrest the victim]; or threats of bodily harm, ei-

ther explicit or implicit; and (2) at the time of penetration, there was no consent.

In State v. Stevens, 53 P.3d 356 (Mont. 2002), the proprietor of a massage business was convicted of assaulting several clients, whom he sexually penetrated without warning in the course of a normal massage. The applicable statute
permitted conviction when a complainant is “compelled to submit by force” or is “incapable of consent because . . . physically helpless.” In the case of a complainant who had fallen asleep prior to the sexual act, the court affirmed the conviction
on the ground that the complainant was “physically helpless.” But the court overturned convictions involving several clients who had been awake and had “frozen” when they became aware of the sexual acts. The court said that these com-
plainants were not “unconscious or otherwise physically unable to communicate unwillingness,” and that the defendant stopped as soon as they objected; thus the defendant had not compelled them to submit by using force beyond that inherent
in the sexual acts themselves. Id. at 364.

p. 398
p.399

3. Justifications for the force requirement. (a) Traditional justifications. In cases of unwanted sexual penetration, the relevance of physical force as an aggravating factor is readily apparent. But at the time of Rusk and before,
why was proof that the defendant used or threatened force considered necessary to support any conviction at all? What might have motivated legislatures and courts of that era to make physical force a strict requirement?

(b) Justifications today? As previous Notes make clear, just over half of the states retain “force” as a statutory requirement — not just for enhanced punishment but for any felony conviction at all. Do the original reasons for the force
requirement retain validity today? If not, do other reasons explain (or justify) keeping force as a required element? And what are the costs of doing so? On facts like those in Rusk, should a contemporary court uphold a conviction in the absence of
actions equivalent to “the actual force applied by Rusk to Pat's neck”?

Professor David P. Bryden argues that requiring proof of force can still serve a legitimate function (Redefining Rape, 3 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 317, 376-387 (2000)):

[The force requirement] has reduced the danger of erroneous convictions by requiring objective evidence of the victim's nonconsent and the perpetrator’s intention to have nonconsensual intercourse. [Numerous criminal

law rules are cast as substantive requirements, though in reality they merely serve a corroborative function, such as the requirement of a “substantial step” in the law of attempt (pp. 611-621 infra).] The common thread run-

ning through all these corroborative rules is not so much distrust of crime victims as distrust of the abilities of jurors to resolve certain types of issues.

[lff the [force requirement] is abolished, the physical act of rape will not necessarily differ from ordinary sex. . . . Claims of mistake will be more plausible, and courts may [have to] become more receptive to those
claims.

[The force requirement also serves a] Rubicon Function. [Sometimes], one does not truly know one’s intentions until the time comes to cross the Rubicon. . . . Ambivalence, sudden decisions, and changes of mind
are all extremely common. . . . In some cases, even an omniscient factfinder could not describe the woman's subjective state of mind as either consent or nonconsent. Even if the law does not prescribe it, the fact finder must
rely on some sort of external standard.

An external standard is also valuable in ascertaining the man’s intentions. [A claim of consent is] usually implausible, if a man claimed that his acquaintance had given him his wallet full of cash, identification, and
credit cards. In contrast, the mere act of intercourse is as consistent with consensual as with nonconsensual sex. [T]he difficulties of drawing a boundary between consensual and nonconsensual events, and of ascertaining
whether the defendant deliberately or negligently crossed that boundary, are far greater in the context of sex with an acquaintance than in such fields as transfers of property, stranger rapes, and nonsexual assaults.

Yet [to say that a rule has important theoretical virtues is not to say that those virtues necessarily outweigh its costs. . . . Inevitably, the [force requirement] permits some unwanted sexual encounters... . The
moral,

p.399
. 400

in short, is not that the [force requirement] is necessarily the best possible rule, but that the problem is considerably more complex than most critics of [that requirement] have recognized.

QUESTIONS: Do you agree with Professor Bryden? If not, how would you respond? Professor Bryden notes that actus reus requirements can serve corroborative functions, as they do in the law of attempt. A stringent actus reus requirement for
attempt can also mitigate the risk of discriminatory enforcement that a purely subjective-intent test allows. See pp. 618-619 infra. Are those concerns less pressing in the context of rape? If not, are there countervailing considerations in the context
of rape that outweigh the concerns about equal enforcement?

4, The resistance requirement. No American state retains the old requirement that a rape conviction always requires the victim to resist “to the utmost,” but several require “earnest” or “reasonable” resistance.°* In the remaining
states, resistance is no longer formally required. But even when potential jurors say they oppose a resistance requirement, in deliberations some of them nonetheless argue for acquittal because the complainant didn’t physically resist.2°

California's statutory resistance requirement was repealed in 1980. Compare Cal. Penal Code §261(3) (1950) with Cal. Penal Code §261(a)(2) (2021), pp. 387-388 supra. The concerns that led to the repeal are summarized in People v.
Barnes, 721 P.2d 110, 117-120 (Cal. 1986):

[While some women respond to sexual assault with active resistance, others “freeze.” [Llack of physical resistance may reflect a “profound primal terror” rather than consent. [T]he law does not expect .. . that in defending

oneself or one’s property from [robbery, kidnapping and assault], a person must risk injury or death by displaying resistance in the face of attack. [Previous assumptions], which singled out the credibility of rape complaints

as suspect, have no place in a modern system of jurisprudence.

QUESTIONS: Do statutes like California's solve the problem of resistance? Under that regime, the prosecution need not prove resistance, but it still must prove that the defendant used or threatened force. And when a victim submits without
resisting, evidence of force beyond that incidental to the sexual act itself often will be ambiguous. So although California no longer requires resistance, doesn't that approach still make prosecution pretty difficult without it?

5. Proving force. One of the most vexing problems in current rape law arises from the fact that in mutually desired sexual interaction, social custom and the law itself regard quite a bit of physical action as acceptable and expected.
The law must determine whether the acts of an alleged aggressor exceeded that level. Consider that issue in light of the material that follows.

p. 400
p.401
State v. DiPetrillo
Supreme Court of Rhode Island
922 A.2d 124 (2007)

GoLpBere, J.: [The victim (“Jane”) was a 19-year-old employee in the 30-year-old defendant's business. One night, after asking her to work late, the defendant called Jane over to his desk. He then] grabbed her by the wrist, pulled her
onto his lap, and began kissing her. According to Jane, she initially . .. kissed him back. But then she protested, telling DiPetrillo “we can’t do this”. . .. [He then] physically moved her from his lap onto the seat of the chair. With his hands placed on
each of the chair's arms, he stood over her and continued kissing her; he also put his hand under her shirt and touched her breast.

At trial, Jane testified that at this point she was in fear, tried to avoid the kissing by moving her face away, and repeatedly told defendant to “stop it; he was my boss, we couldn't do this.” She also tried to stop him from touching her
breast by telling him several times “no, we halve] to stop” and then pushing his hand away. This resistance was unavailing. DiPetrillo continued his assault by pulling Jane's pants and underwear down to her knees and then digitally penetrating her
vagina with one of [his] fingers. . .. Scared and in shock, Jane again told DiPetrillo “we have to stop”; she stood up, restored her clothing, and [was eventually able] to walk away... . The defendant then said, “we shouldn't tell anybody about what
happened.”

[Defendant was charged with first-degree sexual assault (Rhode Island’s statutory equivalent of rape), requiring proof of sexual penetration by “force or coercion” and second-degree sexual assault, requiring proof of sexual contact by
“force or coercion.2 After a bench trial, the court found defendant guilty on both counts.]

The trial justice . . . found that the evidence satisfied two distinct categories of force and coercion:

[Alll of the ingredients were present . . . for the defendant to overbear the will of this diminutive and attractive young girl, either by the very authority that he represented, or by a modicum of physical force. As it turned out, ..

both of those circumstances occurred. [AJpart from a single kiss at the outset, she did not want the defendant to continue his advances. [She] kept telling . . . him it was wrong. . .. She pushed at his chest and tried, to no

avail, to push away from his grasp. [S]he described how the defendant hovered over her as she sat trapped and fearful in his chair, with both of his hands on each arm of the chair. [A]ll of the relevant hallmarks of force or co-

ercion . . . , both physical as well as psychological, were part and parcel of the defendant's misconduct... .

Generally speaking, force or coercion means overcoming the victim of sexual assault through the application of physical force or violence, against
p.401
p.402

her will, and without her consent. . . . Force or coercion may also consist of the imposition of psychological pressure upon a person who, under all of the circumstances, is vulnerable and susceptible to such pressure.

The defendant asserts that when the trial justice defined the elements of first- and second-degree sexual assault, he interpreted the element of “force or coercion”’ . . . by reference to improper or inapplicable standards. Specifically,
DiPetrillo argues that the trial justice “conflated the ‘force or coercion’ standard” adopted by the General Assembly with other theories, such as: “the non-consent standard; the psychological-coercion-of-susceptible-victim standard; and the dis-
agreeable sexual encounter standard.”

[lIn State v. Burke, 522 A.2d 725 (R.I. 1987), .. . the defendant, a uniformed and armed police officer, was convicted of two counts of first-degree sexual assault upon an alcoholic victim whom he had picked up in his police cruiser while
she was hitchhiking. Although the defendant in Burke never orally threatened the victim with violence if she did not submit to his command to perform oral sex upon him, we nonetheless agreed that the defendant coerced the victim to submit “by
threatening to use force or violence on [her] and [that] the victim reasonably believe[d] that the accused hald] the present ability to execute those threats.” . .. However, we also noted that the factual situation in Burke was unusual in that “the sex-
ual assault crime involved] a person in a position of authority who is armed, speaks in terms of peremptory command,” and “that the victim did not consent to the sexual activity and reasonably believed that resistance would be useless.” . . .

DiPetrillo now argues that . . . the Burke analysis of psychological-pressure-on-a-vulnerable-victim should [not] apply to the facts in his case. . . . We agree. [We are not willing to extend the Burke analysis of implied threats to the facts
in this case, in which the implied threat arose solely in the context of an employment relationship.

[We are not convinced that the trial justice's finding of guilt based on physical force . . . can constitute a separate and independent finding of guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The trial justice's finding that “all of the ingredients were
present” in order “for the defendant to overbear the will” of this victim, “either by the very authority that he represented, or by a modicum of physical force” and his conclusion that all of the “relevant hallmarks of force or coercion . . . both physical
as well as psychological, were part and parcel of the defendant's misconduct,” gives us pause. [WJe are left with uncertainty about whether defendant was convicted based on a finding of force and coercion by physical force... .

p.402
p.403

We therefore vacate the judgment and remand this case to the trial justice with directions to . . . determine whether the state has established, beyond a reasonable doubt, that defendant is guilty of the crimes charged in the indictment,
based solely on physical force as set forth in §11-37-1(2)(i).. ..

Fianerry, J., dissenting. [T]he only fair reading of the trial justice's decision is that he found that the complaining witness (Jane) was overborne by a combination of psychological pressure arising from DiPetrillo’s authority over her as
an employee and the application of some minimal physical force. [The trial justice] found that the evidence of physical force . .. amounted to only a “modicum,” and that Jane was ultimately overcome by the entirety of the misconduct and not by

either of the individual elements that comprised it. [T]here was no finding that the amount of physical force present in the record — i.e. a modicum!® — could have, by itself, overcome the complaining witness . . . .12 [It is] apparent that, putting
those psychological considerations aside, . . . the state failed to prove, and the trial justice did not find, that the element of force or coercion was satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt... .

There is little doubt . . . that Craig DiPetrillo’s actions on the night in question were boorish to the extreme, and that he may be a cad and a louse. But because the state failed to prove that all the elements of the crimes charged were
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt, | would vacate his conviction and order the entry of a judgment of acquittal.

COMMONWEALTH v. TORRES, 2016 MASS. APP. UNPUB. LEXIS 867: In the spring of 2012, the defendant and the complainant had been in a dating relationship for between eight and ten years. Their relationship was a volatile one. The complainant
obtained multiple restraining orders against the defendant over the years and there was at least occasional police intervention. [O]nce, “a long time ago” according to the complainant, the defendant became violent when the complainant declined
to have sex with him, and officers were called to intercede. Nevertheless, the relationship continued with at least intermittent cohabitation. . ..

By April of 2012, . . . the relationship was coming to an end. It is during this time that the complainant alleges that the defendant raped her numerous times, specifically [that he] both raped and assaulted and beat her between May 1 and
May 19. . .. The jury convicted [the defendant] of rape [for that] conduct. . ..

The defendant concedes . . . that the sexual relationship was not consensual. . . . However, he contends that there was insufficient evidence of force or threat of force. .. . The sum total of the complainant's testimony on direct exami-
nation concerning the alleged rape in May is set out in the margin.

[Here the court quoted this testimony from the Commonwealth's direct examination of the complainant:

p.403

Tne 08

Q. “And did a rape happen in May of 20122”

A. “Yes.”

Q. “And where were you at when that rape happened?”

A. “Itwas in my house again.” ..

Q. “...ifyou can tell the jury what happened in the early part of May?”

A. “He raped me again.” .. .

Q. “And if you can tell the jury and the court how did this rape occur?”

A. “It happened again at home. That time | just whatever, he packed up his stuff and then I took him to work, finally.” . ..]

[T]he Commonwealth argues that even though the complainant's statement that she had been “raped” again in May “was made without explication,” the jury could have reasonably inferred from her statement, “[t]hat time | just what-
ever,” that her “will was overborne] by her fear of denying the defendant's sexual demands based on her prior experiences of telling him ‘no.” [T]he Commonwealth argues that use of force or threat of force is not required where a victim's consent
was obtained from fear of the defendant's conduct. . .

“In a rape case, the element of force and against the will of the victim may be established by physical force or constructive force. Constructive force requires proof that the victim was afraid or that she submitted to the defendant
because his conduct intimidated her.” Commonwealth v. Vasquez, 462 Mass. 827, 846 (2012)... . In Commonwealth v. Wallace, 76 Mass. App. Ct. 411, 418 (2010), for example, we agreed with the Commonwealth that the events surrounding an in-
cident of alleged rape “must be viewed in light of the history of [the] relationship [between the defendant and the victim] and the defendant's predatory behavior.”

However, Wallace and other constructive force cases typically involve an adult authority figure who subjects an adolescent or preadolescent child to pervasive sexual abuse over a number of years. . . . See id. (defendant raped victim
for many years, starting when victim was eleven years old, “many individual factors . . . collectively support[ed] the Commonwealth's theory of “force”: the defendant's pushing the still-young victim onto the bed and pinning him there, the locking
of the door, the pillow over the head, and the defendant's regularly plying [him] with alcohol,” and victim testified that “he feared the consequences of resisting the defendant's sexual advances”). See also [Commonwealth v. Caracciola, 409 Mass.

648 (1991)] (. .. defendant, while posing as police officer and wearing gun, directed victim into his car, . .. and made her have sexual intercourse and where victim testified that she “was really scared [and] was petrified he was going to put [her] in
jail”).

Here, unlike the other cases, the evidence was not of exploitation by an authority figure but that the defendant and the complainant had been in a dating relationship over a number of years, which though volatile had also involved a
consensual sexual relationship at some points. Moreover, the complainant did not testify to any fear she had of the defendant as a basis for submitting in the May incident. [The] fight after the complainant refused to have sex with the defendant “[a]
long time ago” does not provide the same level of background fear and coercion “calculated to instill fear in the complainant in order for the defendant to achieve his goal,” nor does her statement, “[t]hat time | just whatever,” indicate that she sub-
mitted because of fear. [T]he prosecutor failed to elicit “the circumstances or fear in which the [complainant was] placed, [or] the impact of those

p. 404
p. 405
circumstances or fear on [her] power to resist”. .. such that the jury could make a “determination whether conduct complained of . . . was accomplished by force and against the victim's will.” .. . 12

. ..A person in a previously or even ongoing consensual relationship can be a victim of constructive force. Here, however, the Commonwealth's evidence, even when viewed in the most favorable light, was not sufficient to warrant the
conclusion that the complainant had submitted to the defendant because of fear. Consequently, the defendant's rape conviction must be reversed. . .

NOTES ON THE VARIETIES OF “FORCE”

1. Implicit coercion in the workplace. Company policies often limit permissible intimate relationships between employees, and sexual harassment laws impose civil liability under some circumstances. But most workplaces do not
categorically prohibit all sexual advances, and sexual relationships between employees (including between a supervisor and a subordinate) are often permitted, provided that they are consensual. Thus, employees like Jane often face pressure
to acquiesce in the sexual advances of a supervisor. Workers in that situation may appear to consent even though their consent arguably is tainted by this contextual pressure. There is continuing disagreement — in the law and in society more
broadly — about whether a supervisor in that situation should be guilty of a sexual crime. We consider that question at p. 428 infra.

But the DiPetrillo case did not necessarily turn on this controversial issue, because Jane did not acquiesce; she made plain that she would not cooperate. Under those circumstances, why is there doubt about DiPetrillo's guilt? Was the
problem for the prosecution the fact that Jane did not resist more forcefully? If so, should the employment relationship (or their relative ages and sizes) affect the significance of any perceived lack of resistance on her part?

2. Direct but insufficient physical force. Even if the DiPetrillo prosecutors could not rely on the economic and psychological pressures implicit in the employment relationship, we might think they still had a strong case for con-
viction, because the means the defendant used to constrain the victim were not complicated or subtle — he used direct physical force. But the trial judge described that as only a “modicum” of force and did not convict solely on that basis. Why
wasn't that “modicum” of force sufficient to sustain the conviction? Rhode Island doesn't expressly require resistance, but its statute requires force that “[olvercomes the victim” (footnote 3 of the DiPetrillo opinion), in other words, force that in ef-
fect compels submission. What could be the basis for that requirement? Is it justifiable?

p. 405
p. 406

3. Comparing Rusk and DiPetrillo. As we saw above, the Rusk court might not have upheld the conviction except for “the actual force applied by Rusk to Pat's neck.” Would that result — reversal of the conviction in the absence of the
choking evidence — be different in Rhode Island today? In states like Rhode Island, how much have the requirements for a rape conviction changed in the past four decades?

4. Constructive force. Jurisdictions that require force typically accept the principle articulated in Torres, that a “person in a previously or even ongoing consensual relationship can be a victim of constructive force [where] the com-
plainant [submits] because of fear.” But as Torres shows, courts may require evidence of physical intimidation at the moment of the sexual act itself. And some courts are similarly strict even when the defendant, a child-victim’s parent, had been
sexually abusive many times in the past. See State v. Magel, 268 P.3d 666, 670-671 (Or. Ct. App. 2011), where the court set aside a conviction for rape by forcible compulsion:

Although it is not disputed that the victim [the defendant's 13-year-old daughter] actually believed that defendant would physically force her to engage in sexual contact, . . . nothing in the record suggests that defendant

engaged in any force on the day of the [incident] other than the force inherent in the sexual conduct at issue. Furthermore, there was a significant lapse in time since the prior incidents; the victim no longer lived with defen-

dant . ..; and defendant's conduct and statements to the victim on the day of the [incident] itself were not threatening in nature. The evidence supports the view that the prior incidents, though remote in time, influenced the

victim's expectations of defendant and, indeed, compelled her to submit. However, . . . that influence does not qualify as an implied threat in the legal sense and, therefore, does not constitute forcible compulsion.

Consider this comment:

SUSAN ESTRICH, REAL RAPE 61-62, 65, 69 (1987): [Estrich observes that cases similar to Torres and Magel adopt the] male notion of a fight as the working definition of “force.” In a fight you hit your assailant with your fists or your elbows or your
knees. Ina fight the person attacked fights back. . . . To say that there is no “force” [without that kind of fight] is to create a gulf between power and force and to define the latter strictly in schoolboy terms. [This] version of a reasonable person is
‘one who does not scare easily, one who does not feel vulnerable, . . . one who fights back. . . . The reasonable woman, it seems, is not a schoolboy “sissy”; she is a real man. [Thus] the force standard . . . effectively guarantees men freedom to in-
timidate women and exploit their weakness and passivity, so long as they don’t “fight” with them.

QUESTIONS: Do you agree with the results in Torres and Magel? If not, is the problem that “force” is defined too strictly, or that “force” shouldn't be required at all?

5. “Reasonable” fear. When the prosecution relies on “constructive” force, the prevailing rule is that the victim's alleged fear, based on the defendant's conduct at the time of the incident, must be reasonable. In Rusk, for example, all

the judges accepted that rule and disagreed only about whether a jury could find that the victim's fears were reasonably grounded. Why should a victim's fear have to
p. 406
p.407
be objectively “reasonable”? One obvious concern is to assure that the defendant realizes that the other person is submitting out of fear rather than willingness. But suppose the defendant knows that the victim is afraid. Suppose that the defen-
dant subtly but deliberately reinforces that fear. (Reconsider the facts of Rusk.) Shouldn't a conviction be proper regardless of whether a jury or appellate judges consider the fear “reasonable”?

One court has held that a conviction can be sustained when “the victim's fear [is] unreasonable, [but only if] the perpetrator knew of the victim's subjective fear and took advantage of it.”2° Kansas goes further in the direction of protect-
ing victims who submit out of fear. Its statutes provide that “it shall not be a defense [to rape] that the offender did not know or have reason to know . .. that the victim was overcome by force or fear.”57 And the victim's fear need not be reasonable;
the Kansas Supreme Court has held that “the reasonableness of a particular victim's fear may affect the jury’s assessment of the victim's credibility in arriving at its verdict,” but fear nonetheless remains “an inherently subjective concept.” State v.
Brooks, 317 P.3d 54, 64 (Kan. 2014) (upholding conviction on this basis and sentence to 155 months’ imprisonment). Is this an appropriate solution to the problem?

NOTES ON NONPHYSICAL COERCION

1. Beyond physical compulsion? Should conceptions of force include not only physical force but also other sorts of coercion? Consider this observation (Comment, Towards a Consent Standard in the Law of Rape, 43 U. Chi. L. Rev.
613, 644-645 (1976):

Although the force element has traditionally furthered the policy of physical protection, as well as serving an evidentiary function, . .. freedom of sexual choice rather than physical protection is the primary value served by

criminalization of rape. Furthermore, a woman's decision to submit to physical force may be less agonizing than her decision to have intercourse with a person who holds economic or emotional power over her and her fam-

ily. Although one can argue that a man who obtains intercourse through threats of nonphysical harm should be punished less severely than a violent rapist, the growing legal appreciation of the reality of mental injury and the

power of economic duress suggests that he nonetheless should be punished. [T]he freedom of sexual choice which is to be protected by rape law can be as effectively negated by nonphysical as by physical coercion.

Compare Commonwealth v. Mlinarich, 498 A.2d 395 (Pa. Super. 1985).°8 A 14-year-old girl had been committed to a juvenile detention home after stealing from her brother. Subsequently, the defendant agreed to assume custody for
her,
p.407
p. 408
and she was placed in his home. She submitted to his sexual advances after he threatened to send her back to the detention home if she refused. He was convicted of corrupting the morals of a minor and of committing rape “by threat of forcible
compulsion. . ..” 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. §3121(2). The Superior Court reversed the rape conviction:
Our task in this case is made more difficult because the victim of appellant's sexual advances was a fourteen-year-old child. The definition which we adopt, however, will know no age limitation. It is with a view to general
application, therefore, that we attempt to define the parameters of the legislative proscription against sexual intercourse by forcible compulsion or threat of forcible compulsion.
The term “force” [has] historically been understood by the courts and legal scholars to mean physical force or violence. . . .
To define “forcible compulsion” so as to permit a conviction for rape whenever sexual intercourse is induced by “any threat” or [as urged by the dissent] by “physical, moral or intellectual means or by the exigen-
cies of the circumstances” will undoubtedly have unfortunate consequences. If a man takes a destitute widow into his home and provides support for her and her family, such a definition of forcible compulsion will convict
him of attempted rape if he threatens to withdraw his support and compel her to leave unless she engages in sexual intercourse. Similarly, a person may be guilty of rape if he or she extorts sexual favors from another person
upon threat of discharging the other or his or her spouse from a position of employment, . . . or upon threat of disclosing the other's adultery. [S]uch an interpretation . . . will place in the hands of jurors almost unlimited
discretion to determine which acts, threats or promises will transform sexual intercourse into rape. Without intending to condone any of the foregoing, reprehensible acts, [we use them] to illustrate the intolerable uncertainty
which a wholly elastic definition of rape will create. . ..
We hold that rape, as defined by the legislature . . . requires actual physical compulsion or violence or a threat of physical compulsion or violence sufficient to prevent resistance by a person of reasonable
resolution... .
2. Solutions? (a) Duress? Several states extend the offense of rape or sexual assault to situations in which consent is obtained by “duress” or “coercion,”°2 terms explained in highly elastic language or not defined at all.{2 The 1962
Model Penal Code proposed a more delimited solution. MPC §213.1(2) (1962) defined an offense of “gross sexual imposition,” committed when submission was compelled by “any threat that would prevent resistance by a woman of ordinary res-
olution.” See p. 388 supra.
As applied to the facts in Mlinarich, this test would readily permit conviction. But how does this test apply to the Mlinarich court's hypothetical of an impoverished
p. 408
p. 409
parent of young children, who submits to the sexual advances of someone who threatens to withhold financial support? Does this approach permit an appropriate conviction or does it extend criminal liability too far? Does it leave too much discre-
tion in the hands of prosecutors and juries?
An important limitation in this approach is that coercion must result from a “threat.” Is the proposition to the impoverished parent a threat to withdraw support or just an offer to continue providing it? The choice of labels may seem
arbitrary, but it has large implications for the scope of criminal liability. And drafters of the 1962 Code did not intend to cover all inducements that would cause a person of ordinary resolution to submit. See Model Penal Code and Commentaries
§213.1 at 314 (1980):

[Slubmission [must result] from coercion rather than bargain. [I]f a wealthy man were to threaten to withdraw financial support from his unemployed girlfriend, it is at least arguable [that this] “would prevent resistance by a

woman of ordinary resolution.” The reason why this case is excluded from liability . .. is not the gravity of the harm threatened — it may be quite substantial — but its essential character as part of a process of a bargain. He

is not guilty of compulsion overwhelming the will of his victim but only of offering her an unattractive choice to avoid some unwanted alternative.

The upshot of this approach is that when a person announces an intention to withdraw financial support from a person in desperate need, criminal liability depends on whether the situation involves coercion or bargaining, a threat or an
offer. Which is it?

(b) The 2021 Model Penal Code. The 2021 revision of the MPC endorses the 1962 provision (Note 2(a), supra) prohibiting nonviolent coercion, but with several modifications. It eliminates the reference to resistance; makes certain
threats (for example, a threat to accuse someone of a criminal offense) sufficient per se, without regard to their impact on the “ordinary” person; and carries forward the catch-all provision prohibiting a threat to take “any action .. . that would cause
submission . . . by someone of ordinary resolution.” See MPC §213.4(1)(b), in the Appendix in this book. Consider how MPC §213.4(1)(b) (2021) should apply to the two problems that follow.

PROBLEMS

1. Disclosing an affair. In State v. Brooks, p. 407 supra, the defendant accessed the e-mail account of his ex-wife (J.P.) and copied messages indicating that she and a married co-worker were having an affair. He then went to her
house and told her he would give copies of the e-mails to her boss and to her co-worker's wife if she did not have sex with him. J.P. refused “in no uncertain terms,” but when Brooks got “agitated,” she complied, holding her hands over her face
and closing her eyes to avoid looking at him.

Brooks was convicted of blackmail, breach of privacy, and rape “[w]hen the victim is overcome by force or fear.” At trial, J.P. acknowledged she did not think Brooks would have harmed her physically had she refused his demand and
did not think her employment conditions would be adversely affected if the affair came to

p.409

p.410
light. But she said she didn’t want the relationship publicized because many of her colleagues knew her co-worker's wife and disclosure of the affair would taint the workplace. She testified that she had submitted only because Brooks threatened
to expose the affair if she did not. The Kansas Supreme Court affirmed the convictions.“ Addressing the rape charge, the court said:

[The jury] could clearly conclude that [J.P.’s fear] influenced her so strongly as to make her physically helpless. [A] rational factfinder could conclude [that J.P_] was “immobilized or paralyzed” with fear. To find otherwise

validates those who espouse a “legitimate rape” theory, i.e., rape as a result of physical violence as the sole means by which a rapist can be held criminally accountable. . . .

Moniz, J., dissenting: [T]he evidence fell far short of establishing that the victim was overcome by force or fear. . . . After hearing Brooks’ threats, J.P. called the coworker with whom she was having the affair to
tell him about the threats. . . . Yet J.P. did not contact law enforcement.
[When] Brooks arrived at J.P.’s home . . . J.P. did not immediately succumb to Brooks’ threats but instead went upstairs to her bedroom, ostensibly trying to put her daughter to sleep, but actually “ . . . hopling]

maybe that he would leave.” . . . J.P. acknowledged that she had a phone in her bedroom and could have called police at any time after Brooks arrived, but she did not do so. [These] are not the actions of someone immo-

bilized or paralyzed by fear. . .. J.P. never testified that her fear . . . overwhelmed her, immobilized her, or paralyzed her. Rather, when asked about the nature of her concern she testified: “[Ijt's not something [the affair] you

want public. [A] lot of people know him and his wife, and a lot of people know me, and just it was not a good situation.” . .

| would hold that the State does not prove the actus reus of the crime of rape simply by establishing that the victim did not consent and that the victim feared the defendant. Instead, the State must present suffi-
cient evidence that the victim . . . was immobilized or paralyzed by that fear.

QUESTIONS: How would Brooks be decided under MPC §213.4(1)(b)? How should Brooks be decided?

2. Financial leverage. In State v. Lovely, 480 A.2d 847 (N.H. 1984), the manager of a liquor store (Lovely) hired a drifter to work at the store, began paying the rent on the man’s apartment, and invited him to move into Lovely’s home,
where they began a sexual relationship. When the drifter tried to break off the affair, Lovely pressured him to submit to further sexual acts by threatening to stop paying his rent, to kick him out of Lovely’s home, and to get him fired from his liquor
store job. The applicable statute made it a felony to coerce sexual submission “by threatening to retaliate against the victim.” The court upheld Lovely’s conviction, ruling that the trial judge had properly allowed the jury to consider,

p.410
pat
as impermissible retaliation, not only his threat to get the man fired but also his threats to stop paying the man’s rent and to evict the man from Lovely's home.
QUESTIONS: Is the result sound? Using financial leverage for sexual advantage seems far from rare, but prosecutions in these circumstances are extremely unusual. Why do you think Lovely was singled out for prosecution? Does an option of
criminal prosecution in situations like this create too much risk of discriminatory law enforcement? Or is criminal liability appropriate? Consider these viewpoints.
STEPHEN J. SCHULHOFER, THE FEMINIST CHALLENGE IN CRIMINAL LAW, 143 U. PA. L. REV. 2151, 2182 (1995): Autonomy cannot mean freedom from all constraints upon choice, but it does entail freedom from those constraints that our culture
identifies as illegitimate... . This modest conception of personal autonomy offers boundaries that are specific and, yet, far reaching. ..

[llf a supervisor tries to get sexual favors by offering a promotion (or by threatening to veto one), he is confronting the employee with alternatives (no matter whether we call them offers or threats) that his position gives him no right to
impose. If the supervisor used his position to get an economic payoff from the employee, he would be guilty of extortion. If a professor threatened to withhold a good grade or a good recommendation until he got some cash from a student, again
he would be guilty of extortion.

The worker or student should have the same right to control her sexuality that she has to control her wages or her bank account. What makes the woman's consent invalid is not that the supervisor's act involves too much pressure.
What makes the consent invalid is that rules already settled in our culture deny the supervisor the right to require an employee to choose between her promotion and her legally protected interests. One of those interests should be — and is — her
sexual independence.

STEPHEN J. SCHULHOFER, UNWANTED SEX 163-164 (1998): Sex is not a permissible condition of ordinary employment. But sexual fulfillment is a legitimate and valued goal of marriage and other ongoing, intimate relationships. [A person's]
implicit “threat” (“I won't support you unless we have a sexual relationship”) expresses one of the choices he is — and should be — entitled to make in shaping his personal relationships. And his “threat” takes from the woman nothing that she is
— of should be — entitled to claim... .

The coercion problem seems different when a man... . threatens to terminate a current relationship and throw [a destitute] mother and her children out onto the street unless she meets his sexual needs. The mother may reasonably feel
that she has no real choice but to submit to his demands. [Nonetheless] conclusions about coercion [should] turn not on the degree of pressure but on the legitimacy of the proposal itself. [If] the relationship has been short-lived and without mu-
tual commitments, existing laws would not obligate the man to support her.

[But wle cannot ignore the impact of [existing laws] that leave the desperate mother vulnerable in this way. . . . An obligation of financial support could certainly be imposed . . . even in the absence of marriage. . . . There are limits,
however, to how far in this direction the law can sensibly develop. . . . A central component of [sexual autonomy] is the freedom to seek intimacy with persons of our own choosing. . . . Equally important, in the case of relationships short of marriage
or its equivalent, is the freedom to move on — to live independently or to seek a new partner — when existing ties become a source of unacceptable emotional and sexual stress.

pat
p.4i2

Alegal system that obliged [someone] to support a former sexual partner, in the absence of the mutual commitments of a long-term relationship, would impose an enormous burden on these components of freedom. . . . Efforts to use
financial leverage in personal relationships . . . surely deserve criticism. . . . But they should not inevitably violate legal rights.

MARTHA CHAMALLAS, CONSENT, EQUALITY, AND THE LEGAL CONTROL OF SEXUAL CONDUCT, 61 S. CAL. L. REV. 777, 826 (1988): The refusal to regard economically coerced sex as rape allows men to continue to use their economic superiority
to gain sexual advantages, provided that they use only their own resources (not their employer's) and target only those women who show some willingness to tie sex to financial gain. From the target’s standpoint, however, the economic pressure
may feel the same regardless of whether it is her employer or her lover who threatens economic harm if sex is denied them.

DAVID P. BRYDEN, REDEFINING RAPE, 3 BUFF. CRIM. L. REV. 317, 445 (2000): Of course, men often “use their economic superiority to gain sexual advantages,” but women often use their sexual superiority to gain economic advantages. So who is
the extortionist?

2. Absence of Consent

Professor Deborah Tuerkheimer observes that criminal law's force requirement is “woefully out of step with modem conceptions of sex.” Tuerkheimer, Rape On and Off Campus, 65 Emory LJ. 1, 4 (2015). Particularly concerning, she
argues, are “three categories of cases[;] sleep, intoxication, and relational control [where] nonconsensual intercourse can be accomplished without ‘force.”” Id. at 16.

That problem, and many of the line-drawing difficulties addressed in the preceding section, are eliminated (or appear to be eliminated) by punishing any sexual penetration without consent. Although the use or threat of physical force
remains a sentencing consideration in all jurisdictions, almost half the states make sexual penetration without consent a felony, without requiring physical or nonphysical coercion. See p. 393, supra. The 2021 revision of the MPC does so as well.
See §213.6 in the Appendix in this book. Is this a better approach? To what extent does it really solve the problems of force-based regimes? What new problems does it create? Consider those questions in light of the material that follows. Subsec-
tion a examines the replacement of force with non-consent as rape law’s central concern. Subsection b examines the issue that is now decisive, but elusive and fraught: What does “consent” mean?

a. Replacing Force with Non-Consent
State in the Interest of M.T.S.

New Jersey Supreme Court

609 A.2d 1266 (N.J. 1992)

HANDLER, J. . . . [M.T.S.], a seventeen-year-old boy, engaged in consensual kissing and heavy petting with a fifteen-year-old girl and thereafter engaged in actual sexual penetration of the girl to which she had not consented. There was

no
p.412
p.413
evidence or suggestion that the juvenile used any unusual or extra force or threats to accomplish the act of penetration.

The trial court determined that the juvenile was delinquent for committing a sexual assault. The Appellate Division reversed, . . . concluding that non-consensual penetration does not constitute sexual assault unless it is accompanied by
some level of force more than that necessary to accomplish the penetration. We granted the State’s petition for certification. . . .

C.G. was living with her mother [and] several other people, including M.T.S. and his girlfriend. [M.T.S.] slept downstairs on a couch. C.G. had her own room on the second floor. . . . At trial, C.G. and M.T.S. offered very different accounts
[of the incident]. The trial court did not credit fully either teenager's testimony.

C.G. stated that . . . M.T.S. had told her three or four times that he “was going to make a surprise visit up in [her] bedroom.” C.G. said she considered the comments a joke because M.T.S. frequently teased her. She testified that she
awoke that night at approximately 1:30 a.m. and saw M.T.S., fully clothed, standing in her doorway. According to C.G., M.T.S. said “he was going to tease [her] a little bit.” C.G. testified that she “didn’t think anything of it”; she used the bathroom

and returned to bed, falling into a “heavy” sleep within fifteen minutes. The next event C.G. claimed to recall was waking up with M.T.S. on top of her, her underpants and shorts [removed.] She said “his penis was into [her] vagina.” As soon as C.G.
realized what had happened, she said, she immediately slapped M.T.S. once in the face, then “told him to get off [her], and get out.” She did not scream or cry out. She testified that M.T.S. complied in less than one minute after being struck. [She
then] “fell asleep crying.” . . . She explained that she did not immediately tell her mother or anyone else in the house . . . because she was “scared and in shock.” . . . By her own account, C.G. was not otherwise harmed by M.T.S. [In the morning
C.G. told her mother about the encounter and said that they would have to “get [M.T.S.] out of the house.” C.G. and her mother then filed a complaint with the police.)

[M.T.S]] testified that during the three days preceding the incident they had been “kissing and necking” and had discussed having sexual intercourse. . . . He said C.G. repeatedly had encouraged him to “make a surprise visit up in her
room.”

M.S. testified that at [1:15 a.m, he entered C.G.'s bedroom . . . and the two began “kissing and alll”. . . . undressed each other and . . . proceeded to engage in sexual intercourse. According to M.T.S., [she then] said “stop, get off,”
and he “hopped off right away.” [He] asked C.G. what was wrong; she replied with a back-hand to his face. He recalled asking C.G. what was wrong a second time, and her replying, “how can you take advantage of me or something like that.”
M.S. said that he . . . told C.G. to calm down, but that she then told him to get away from her and began to cry. Before leaving the room, he told C.G.,“. .. don’t tell anybody about this . .. it would just screw everything up.” He then walked down-
stairs and went to sleep.

... M-T.S. was charged with conduct that if engaged in by an adult would constitute second-degree sexual assault. [T]he court concluded that the victim had consented to . . . heavy petting with M.T.S. [but] had not consented to the
actual sexual act. Accordingly, the court concluded that the State had proven second-degree sexual assault beyond a reasonable doubt. On appeal, following the

p.4t3
Cnn at
imposition of suspended sentences on the [sexual assault] charges, the Appellate Division [reversed the] adjudication of delinquency. . . .

NwJ.S.A. 2C:14-2c(1) defines “sexual assault” as the commission “of sexual penetration” “with another person” with the use of “physical force or coercion.” [BJoth the act of “sexual penetration” and the use of “physical force or coer-
cion” are separate and distinct elements of the offense. . .

The State would read “physical force” to entail any amount of sexual touching brought about involuntarily. A showing of sexual penetration coupled with a lack of consent would satisfy the elements of the statute. The Public Defender
urges an interpretation of “physical force” to mean force “used to overcome lack of consent.” That definition equates force with violence and leads to the conclusion that sexual assault requires the application of some amount of force in addition
to the act of penetration. ..

Under traditional rape law, in order to prove that a rape had occurred, the State had to show both that force had been used and that the penetration had been against the woman's will. [A] woman who was above the age of consent had
actively and affirmatively to withdraw that consent for the intercourse to be against her will. . .. Critics of rape law agreed that the focus of the crime should be shifted from the victim's behavior to the defendant's conduct, and particularly to its
forceful and assaultive, rather than sexual, character. [T]he reform goal was not so much to purge the entire concept of consent from the law as to eliminate the burden that had been placed on victims to prove they had not consented. . . .

[The] Model Penal Code (MPC) proposed provisions did not present a break from traditional rape law. They would have established two principal sexual offenses: aggravated rape . . . and [gross sexual imposition], defined as sexual
intercourse . . . to which [the female] was compelled to submit by any threat that would prevent resistance by a woman of ordinary resolution. The comments to the MPC [state] that the words “compels to submit” require more than “a token initial
resistance.” MPC, §213.1, comments at 306 (revised commentary 1980).

The Legislature did not endorse the Model Penal Code approach to rape. Rather, it passed a fundamentally different proposal in 1978[,] formulated by a coalition of feminist groups. . . . The stated intent of the drafters . .. had been to
remove all features found to be contrary to the interests of rape victims. . .

pai
pats

The reform statute defines sexual assault as penetration accomplished by the use of “physical force” or “coercion,” but it does not define either “physical force” or “coercion.” . . . The task of defining “physical force” therefore was left
to the courts. ...

The Legislature's concept of sexual assault and the role of force was significantly colored by its understanding of the law of assault and battery.2 [JJust as any unauthorized touching is a crime under traditional laws of assault and
battery, . . . so is any unauthorized sexual penetration a crime under the reformed law of sexual assault... . Under the new law, the victim no longer is required to resist and therefore need not have said or done anything in order for the sexual
penetration to be unlawful. . . .[AJn interpretation of the statutory crime of sexual assault to require physical force in addition to that entailed in an act of involuntary or unwanted sexual penetration would be fundamentally inconsistent with the leg-
islative purpose to eliminate any consideration of whether the victim resisted or expressed non-consent.

We note that the contrary interpretation of force — that the element of force need be extrinsic to the sexual act — would not only reintroduce a resistance requirement into the sexual assault law, but also would immunize many acts of
criminal sexual contact short of penetration.2 . . . That the Legislature would have wanted to decriminalize unauthorized sexual intrusions on the bodily integrity of a victim by requiring a showing of force in addition to that entailed in the sexual con-
tact itself is hardly possible.

. .. We conclude, therefore, that any act of sexual penetration engaged in by the defendant without the affirmative and freely given permission of the victim to the specific act of penetration constitutes the offense of sexual assault. .. .
The definition of “physical force” is satisfied under N.J.S.A. 2C:14-2c(1) if the defendant applies any amount of force against another person in the absence of what a reasonable person would believe to be affirmative and freely given permis-
sion. . . . The Legislature recast the law of rape as sexual assault to bring that area of law in line with the expectation of privacy and bodily control that long has characterized most of our private and public law. . .. Each person has the right not only
to decide whether to engage in sexual contact with another, but also to control the circumstances and character of that contact.

[Plermission to the specific act of sexual penetration . . . can be indicated either through words or through actions that, when viewed in the light of all the surrounding circumstances, would demonstrate to a reasonable person affirma-
tive and freely given authorization for the specific act of sexual penetration. . . .

[T]he law places no burden on the alleged victim to have expressed non-consent or to have denied permission, and no inquiry is made into what he or

pats
p.4t6
she thought or desired or why he or she did not resist or protest. . .. Under the reformed statute, a person's failure to protest or resist cannot be considered or used as justification for bodily invasion.

We acknowledge that cases such as this are inherently fact sensitive and depend on the reasoned judgment and common sense of judges and juries. The trial court concluded that the victim had not expressed consent to the act of
intercourse, either through her words or actions. We conclude that the record provides reasonable support for the trial court’s disposition. Accordingly, we reverse the judgment of the Appellate Division and reinstate the disposition of juvenile
delinquency for the commission of second-degree sexual assault.

NOTES

1. The result in M.TS. Professor David P. Bryden comments (Redefining Rape, 3 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 317, 397 (2000)): “As a matter of statutory interpretation, M.T.S. is easy to criticize. If all sex is forcible, then why did the statute re-
quire force in addition to penetration?”

The M.TS. court notes that those who revised New Jersey law wanted “the focus of the crime [to] be shifted from the victim's behavior to the defendant's conduct, and particularly to its forceful and assaultive, rather than sexual, char-
acter.” Does the court's approach further that goal? Or was the court suggesting that the real concer is not to shift attention away from the victim's behavior but to change the kind of victim behavior that is important? Rather than asking whether
resistance indicates non-consent, shouldn't courts and juries focus on whether the victim’s affirmative behavior indicates permission?

2. Grading the offense. In seeking to solve the problem of “force,”M.T-S. places penetration without consent in the same grading category as an offense committed by choking a victim or threatening physical injury — conduct that
New Jersey punishes by a minimum of five and a maximum of ten years’ imprisonment. See p. 414, case footnote 1 supra. In several other states, a similar grading scheme results from explicit statutory language: All nonconsensual penetration

is covered under the rubric of a single offense, and some states authorize sentences of up to life imprisonment for that broadly defined crime.*2 But even among states that distinguish between sexual offenses with and without force, authorized
maximums for offenses based only on the absence of consent vary widely, from a maximum of four years in New York to 15 years in Florida and “hard labor, without benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence, for not more than twenty-
five years” in Louisiana.42
What should be the authorized punishment for cases not involving the use or threat of physical force? Is it important for the law to “send a message” that sexual
p.4t6
p.4i7
imposition without consent is very serious and will not be tolerated (that “rape is rape”22)? Will severe penalties exacerbate the already-serious problem of overincarceration? Or will they cause the opposite problem — discouraging justified pros-
ecutions and convictions in cases not involving force? See Meredith J. Duncan, Sex Crimes and Sexual Miscues: The Need for a Clearer Line Between Forcible Rape and Nonconsensual Sex, 42 Wake Forest L. Rev. 1087 (2007).
3. Lawin action. Even in jurisdictions that have abolished the force requirement in theory, prosecutors often refuse to go forward without evidence of physical force or resistance.“ That pattern may reassure those who believe that the
‘M.S. decision goes too far, but it frustrates those who consider nonconsensual intercourse a serious crime. And American law affords the victim no legal right to challenge a prosecutor's decision not to proceed.£°
If prosecutors and juries continue to look for physical force, is that a reason to retain it as a formal requirement? Or does that resistance reinforce the need for the criminal law to make doubly clear that absence of consent is the central
concern? Alternatively, are there substantive reasons not to extend the criminal law in the manner suggested by M.T.S. case?
b. The Meaning of Consent
The battle over whether to limit rape to cases involving physical force is largely over: American culture now acknowledges unequivocally that sexual penetration without consent is wrong, and in almost half the states that misconduct is
a serious felony. In these jurisdictions, consent is now the only fact (apart from mens rea) that separates lawful sexual intercourse from a criminal offense. But what does “consent” mean? When is it absent? These are the critical questions in the
modern law of rape. And the answers are neither obvious nor easy. Consider the material that follows.
State v. McFadden
2015 Haw. App. LEXIS 457
Intermediate Court of Appeals of Hawai’
MEMORANDUM OPINION
After a jury trial, [McFadden] was found guilty of Sexual Assault in the Second Degree . . . , and sentenced to . . . five years probation including fifteen months in jail with credit for time served. . . .
p.si7
pate
[When camping with a friend, the Complainant met McFadden, who was camping nearby.] McFadden talked to her about the “energy healing” services or “Reiki” that he performed. . .. Complainant eventually agreed to cut McFadden’s
hair in exchange for his Reiki services. She went to McFadden’s tent, where he had a blowup mattress to lie down on. Complainant lay down on the mattress on her back and McFadden began to give her what she described as a massage. . . .
McFadden asked her to remove her bikini top because “sometimes it can constrict your chest from expanding[,]” . .. McFadden [then] asked her to lie down on her stomach. . . . McFadden told her that she could touch him if she wanted to, but

Complainant did not want to. ... McFadden then began touching Complainant under her bikini in the area in between her anus and vagina. Complainant testified that she was confused, but McFadden told her to relax. Complainant testified that
she was not relaxed, that it was apparent that she was not relaxed, and that she was not okay with him putting his hands in that area. However, she did not tell him not to touch her there or to stop.

Complainant then realized that McFadden had put his fingers inside of her anus. At that point, she pushed up and said “I don’t like this. I'm done. | want to leave . .. ,” before grabbing her belongings and leaving. . .. Complainant
testified that McFadden had never asked her if it was okay for him to touch her private area or put his finger inside her anus. She estimated that the time he was touching her in between her anus and vagina and the time he was touching the inside
of her anus was less than a minute total. . ..

McFadden [testified] that when Complainant came into his tent, he told her “I would be addressing all of her organs, including her sexual organs, and if she was okay with that.” [HJe told her “imagine yourself being able to levitate, and
if | could grab your pubic bone and tailbone and shake your whole skeletal so as to relieve the tension. This is what I'm going to be doing” He [admitted putting] the middle finger of his right hand into her anus. He stated that:

| was explaining to her, oh, your perineum has a knot there too. And I started working it. .. . And then the knot in the perineum released, and I said “Do you notice any difference?” And she goes, “Yeah, | could feel the energy

releasing there.”

And I said, “Let me know if you feel anything else.” And after a little bit of time, she goes “Yeah, | can feel my abdominal, something going on there.” . . . | could feel she was getting in touch with something deep

within her, but she wasn't coming out with words. [Alt least ten times | encouraged her to speak, speak, speak. And then finally, she said, “I don’t want to be touched. . ..” And | said, “Okay. What would you like to do?” And

then she says, “I think | want to go out and have a cigarette.” ..

McFadden said that Complainant let him take a drag of the cigarette she was smoking, that she told him “I think I'm done now[.]” and then got her things out of his tent.

[The offense of sexual assault in the second degree requires compulsion. . . . “‘Compulsion’ means absence of consent, or a threat, express or implied, that places a person in fear of public humiliation, property damage, or financial
loss.” HRS §707-700 (2014). Further, “[clonsent signifies voluntary agreement or, concurrence. . . . Consent may be expressed or implied[_]” State v. Adams, 880 P.2d 226, 234 (1994)... .

pst
p.419

In the present case, there was no instruction that consent could either be expressed or implied. [T]here is credible evidence . . . to support a finding of implied consent. . .. McFadden testified that he told Complainant he “would be
addressing all of her organs, including her sexual organs, and if she was okay with that.” McFadden was asked: “Did you tell her that you would be working inside her sexual organs?” McFadden replied: “That would be depending upon if it called
for it. But I was letting her know ahead of time that it would be involved.” ..

This testimony could be viewed by a rational juror as evidence that Complainant impliedly consented to McFadden touching her private areas and putting his finger in her anus as part of his “energy healing” practice. Thus, McFadden
was entitled to an instruction explaining that consent . . . could be either expressed or implied. . .

We reject the State's argument that no reasonable juror could find that Complainant implicitly gave her consent. Although the record . . . supports a finding that Complainant did not consent (e.g., inserting one’s finger into another
person's anus during a massage is more than extremely unusual, McFadden’s statement about touching Complainant's sex organs did not necessarily imply that he would be touching the inside of her body, and the Complainant [testified] she was
not okay with the touching of her private areas). However, a jury would also be entitled to believe . . . that Complainant was aware of how McFadden was touching her and impliedly consented by giving him positive feedback. This construction of
the evidence is arguably supported by both McFadden's and Complainant's testimony that he stopped once she told him she no longer wanted to be touched. . . . Thus, we cannot say that the failure to instruct the jury regarding implied consent
was harmless beyond a reasonable doubt. Therefore, we must vacate the Circuit Court's Judgment against McFadden and remand for a new trial. . . .2

[Reversed]

NOTES

1. The facts in McFadden. Given the testimony in McFadden, should a jury instructed on the theory of “implied consent” find that it was present? What are the strongest arguments for and against that conclusion?
2. Alternative conceptions of consent. Consent has many distinct meanings in ordinary usage and in law. The differences can have a large impact on how rape law actually works.
Akey threshold question is whether consent is an internal state of mind (something a person feels, like willingness) or an external action (something a person does, like giving permission).4° And if consent is an action, what kind of
behavior suffices to establish it?
p.419
nnn 00
Traditional law required physical resistance; verbal protests were considered insufficient because “it is customary for [a woman] to say ‘no, no, no’ (although meaning ‘yes, yes, yes’) and to expect the male to be the aggressor. . .. Itis
always difficult in rape cases to determine whether the female really meant ‘no.'”*2 Few people (if any) defend that view today. But if non-consent is a matter of conduct, what kinds of conduct should the prosecution have to prove? Possible be-
havioral conceptions of non-consent might include:
1. verbal resistance (saying “no”) plus additional behavior (turning away, crying) that makes unwillingness clear (a totality of circumstances approach);
2. verbal resistance alone (“no” always means no);
3. verbal resistance or passivity, silence, or ambivalence — in other words, non-consent is established not only by refusal but also by the absence of permission.
Each of these four possibilities (consent as internal willingness and the three varieties of behavioral consent) is preferred by some American states, and some jurisdictions do not define consent at all.2®
(a) Consider the approach that tums on the complainant's internal state of mind. Supporters of this approach argue that people who are subjectively willing aren't harmed (and therefore punishment isn’t justified) when another person
proceeds to sexual penetration without getting their express permission. Vera Bergelson, Sex and Sensibility: The Meaning of Sexual Consent, in Tatjana Hoernle ed., Sexual Assault and Rape — What Can We Learn from and for Law Reform?
(forthcoming 2022); Kevin Cole, Better Sex Through Criminal Law: Proxy Crimes, Covert Negligence, and Other Difficulties of “Affirmative Consent” in the ALI's Draft Sexual Assault Provisions, 53 San Diego L. Rev. 507 (2016). Do you agree? Or do
people are willing nonetheless have a right to feel aggrieved if another person assumes that willingness and does not bother to check?
Aside from conceptual questions about “harm,” is the internal focus preferable in practical terms? Does it set a workable standard for behavior in sexual interactions? (For example, does it permit a person who is told “no” to argue for
acquittal on the ground that “no” did not necessarily mean that the other person was subjectively unwilling?)
Akey argument for supporters of the internal-willingness approach is that they assume it narrows the reach of the criminal law. A complainant's internal willingness defeats criminal liability even when the accused did not follow a legisla-
tively prescribed script, while at the same time, internal unwillingness cannot support criminal liability when the accused made a nonculpable mistake about the other person's attitude. See Bergelson, supra. But the latter conclusion (no liability
p.420
nnn 9 get
for a nonculpable mistake) depends on the required mens rea with respect to a mistake about consent. We have not considered that issue yet; we examine it in the next section, pp. 435-447, infra. But here it is important to flag the potential
importance of the interaction between actus reus and mens rea. If consent means internal willingness, what happens when complainants testify that they were not truly willing — for example, when a complainant gave “grudging” consent,42 “was
in survival mode, . . . cooperat[ing] only to calm him down,”®2 or gave a “yes” that “wasn't . . . wholehearted”?5!. Defining consent as the victim’s internal willingness cannot do much to narrow the law's reach in such cases (and may even extend
the law's reach) in jurisdictions that impose liability for negligence or strict liability for mistakes about consent. And that is what the great majority of American jurisdictions do. See p. 441-443, infra. Reconsider the merits of the internal conception
of consent after you have examined the mens rea of rape.
(b) What about the first objective approach, under which “no” does not necessarily mean no. Although it might sound like a historical relic, that approach reflects current law in several jurisdictions:

* N.Y. Penal Law §130.05(2)(d) (2021), p. 390, supra: “Lack of consent results from . . . circumstances under which ... . the victim clearly expressed that he or she did not consent to engage in such act, and a reasonable person in the actor’s
situation would have understood such person's words and acts as an expression of lack of consent to such act under all the circumstances.”

* Neb. Rev. Stat. §28-318 (8) (2021): “Without consent means . . . the victim expressed a lack of consent through words [or] conduct. . . . The victim need only resist, either verbally or physically, so as to make the victim's refusal to consent
genuine and real and so as to reasonably make known to the actor the victim’s refusal to consent.” In State v. Gangahar, 609 N.W.2d 690, 692-693, 695 (Neb. Ct. App. 2000), the court reversed the conviction of a hotel manager who sexually
fondled a job applicant, even though she had repeatedly told him no and pushed him away: “[T]he statute allows Gangahar to argue that . . . ‘no did not really mean no.’ [Reversible error occurred because the jury was not instructed to con-
sider whether Hatfield's refusal of consent was genuine, was real, and would be known as such to a reasonable person in Gangahar’s position.”

Why do you think some jurisdictions still adhere to this approach? Is it a justified way to ensure that the accused was sufficiently culpable to warrant the harsh consequences of conviction for a sexual offense? Or does it give victims too
great a burden to defend against sexual overreaching?
p42
p.422
(©) The approach where only affirmative conduct counts as consent is prevalent in college sexual-assault policies, and M.TS. (p. 412, supra) adopts this test for criminal law. The M.T.S. standard is widely considered the most demanding
of those currently found in criminal law. But recall that under M.T.S. “permission . . . can be indicated either through words or through actions . . ., when viewed in the light of all the surrounding circumstances.” Should the law go further? Should
it require explicit verbal permission, in order to protect women from men whose wishful thinking leads them to misinterpret “body language”? Reconsider the facts of McFadden: How would it be decided in New Jersey? Can the McFadden defen-
dant point to facts suggesting consent under the M.TS. test?
Alternatively, does an affirmative consent approach go too far? If a person has not objected to intimate sexual touching, doesn’t their silence indicate consent to the next step? If they weren't willing, wouldn't they turn away or protest?
Those who object to the affirmative-permission approach argue that this requirement is far removed from the actual behavior of willing participants. But how should the law handle situations in which sexual penetration is not clearly foreshadowed,
for example when the person who remains silent is a massage customer who is caught by surprise, having no reason to expect a sexual intrusion. Professor Tuerkheimer (p. 412, supra) found an extensive list of recent cases in which convictions
were overturned because complainants had not expressly protested when they were heavily intoxicated, intimidated in ongoing relationships, or partially asleep.
In those contexts, is a requirement of affirmative permission inappropriate? Consider this comment:52
Underlying the nightmare scenarios of notarized consent agreements and consent apps on every iPhone is the concern that unambiguous documentation, even if not technically necessary, will become a de facto require-
ment because of the factual ambiguity and uncertainty of attempting to establish consent on any other basis, especially if consent is understood as nothing less than “positive cooperation” or “affirmative agreement.” [But]
the same worry applies . . . to almost any alternative approach, such as one that equates non-consent [only] with clearly communicated refusal. Unwillingness, just like positive agreement, must be determined by assessing
words and conduct under the circumstances. . . . Fact-finding difficulty is undeniable in any regime that takes conduct and circumstances into account. But there is no acceptable alternative.
Professor Aya Gruber stresses another dimension of the problem — that the issue for the law of rape is not simply one of setting best practices for respecttul relationships; it is one of determining when conduct warrants incarceration.
She writes (Not Affirmative Consent, 47 U. Pac. L. Rev. 683, 689-690, 692 (2016)):
[here is a burgeoning consensus on what affirmative consent requires: a person seeking intercourse must stop, explicitly seek permission, and obtain permission in some “clear” form. This stop-and-ask approach puts
p.422
429

a legally enforceable obligation on the sex proponent . . . to seek and obtain a “yes” — or perhaps its functional equivalent. . . . There is no question that partners sometimes communicate sexual consent using such a script.

However, . . . this type of a script is more exception than rule. . .. Consent is often understood through ambiguous statements and context. [l|t is wrong to impose radically reformist norms of sexual behavior by incarcerating

those who merely engage in ordinary practices. This makes too much typical behavior criminal and vests the government with too much prosecutorial discretion — discretion it may apply in a discriminatory manner.

(d) The Model Penal Code. In revising the MPC, the ALI Council and its Reporters initially proposed to define consent in external terms: “behavior, including words and conduct — both action and inaction — that communicates . . .
willingness to engage in a specific act of sexual penetration.”5° Opponents associated this language with campus requirements of express permission and believed it would permit overextension of the criminal law. See Cole, Note 2(a), supra. They
successfully proposed a different definition that includes both internal and external elements: It provides that consent “means a person’s willingness to engage in a specific act of sexual penetration,” but it also stipulates that “[a] clear verbal re-
fusal — such as ‘No,’ ‘Stop,’ or ‘Don’t’ — establishes the lack of consent.” MPC §213.0(2)(e)(), (v), in the Appendix in this book.

Does this language narrow the reach of sexual offenses based on non-consent? Consider the impact of the internal approach at trial. Of course, all sexual assault prosecutions are affected by the ubiquitous “swearing contest”: Often
complainants testify that they said “no,” and defendants testify that the complainant said “yes.” But when the decisive issue is complainants’ internal state of mind and complainants testify that they didn’t feel willing, how can defendants challenge
that evidence of non-consent?

In State v. Donahue, 957 N.W.2d 1, 11 (lowa 2021), the complainant admitted that the defendant didn’t use force and that she never indicated lack of consent, but the court nonetheless affirmed the conviction, holding that the victim's
testimony that defendant's actions were “[algainst [her] will” was sufficient by itself to prove absence of consent beyond a reasonable doubt. In Commonwealth v. Hernandez, 242 A.3d 452, 2020 Pa. Super. Unpub. LEXIS 3679, the complainant
(A.B) admitted having no memory of intercourse or the events immediately preceding it, but testified that “she did not, and would not have consented to having sex with her own brother-in-law.” Moreover, “A.B.’s reaction the following morning
[including] her shock and surprise to find herself in a state of undress and Appellant naked . . . is additional circumstantial evidence of her lack of consent.” On this basis the court held that “[the prosecution] satisfied [its] burden of proving lack of
consent beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at *7-8, °11-12.

In light of decisions like these, does the MPC approach, defining consent primarily in terms of the complainant's state of mind, further the goals of its

429
p.424
proponents? Or is it a gift to the prosecution? Is it preferable to the external standard initially proposed by the ALI Council?

3. Resolving the issues. Consider these views on what “consent” should mean:

DOUGLAS N. HUSAK & GEORGE C. THOMAS III, DATE RAPE, SOCIAL CONVENTION AND REASONABLE MISTAKES, 11 LAW & PHIL. 95, 113-123 (1992): [Those who] claim that “no means no” . . . seldom provide any empirical support for [the claim].
[his common-sense notion turns out to be empirically questionable. [SJurely (common sense suggests that) under normal circumstances a woman who is faced with imminent sexual intercourse against her will should have no difficulty deliver-
ing an explicit, unambiguous “no.” If so, virtually all incomplete rejection strategies would eventually escalate into blunt, explicit rejections. . . . Again, however, reality is more complex than ideology. . . . A single physical rejection (for example, F
removes M's hand from her leg) following hours of intense foreplay obviously presents a very different picture of nonconsent than repeated physical and verbal rejections, delivered in an emotional and frightened manner. At some point along this
spectrum, it is no longer reasonable for M to think that F has consented. The reason . . . is not that the word “no” has a magic, transcendental quality. Rather, [t]he social convention is that a certain pattern of linguistic and nonlinguistic behavior
could not reasonably be understood to mean anything other than no.

VIVIAN BERGER, RAPE LAW REFORM AT THE MILLENNIUM, 3 BUFF. CRIM. L. REV. 513, 522 (2000): [Professor Berger, rejecting positions like that of Husak and Thomas, argues that a verbal “no” should always suffice to establish non-consent.
But, she adds, a defendant should not face liability unless] she did say “no.” ... Women should not be over protected.

STEPHEN J. SCHULHOFER, TAKING SEXUAL AUTONOMY SERIOUSLY, 11 LAW & PHIL. 35, 74-75 (1992): [Rejecting the argument that an affirmative-consent requirement “overprotects” women, the author suggests a “parable”:] A hospitalized
athlete, suffering from chronic knee problems, consults a surgeon, who recommends an operation. The athlete is not sure. . . . The operation carries a risk of a burdensome infection [and] may not produce the expected benefits. .. . What to do?
Maybe he should postpone this big step for a while. . .. Now our surgeon becomes impatient. [So he] signals an anesthesiologist to ready the drugs that will flow through an intravenous tube already in place. One last time the surgeon (a sensitive,

modern male) reminds the athlete, “You don’t have to go ahead with this. If you really want me to stop, just say so.” But the athlete, his brain still clouded with doubts, fears, hopes, and uncertainties, says nothing. So the surgeon starts the anes-
thesia and just does it.
p.424
p.426

Consent? Of course not. But why not? The athlete was not compelled to submit. Nobody forced him. .. . If he really objected, all he had to do was say so!

There are, to be sure, important contextual differences between surgery and sexual intimacy. But even allowing for those differences, it would not be implausible to find “consent” by the patient, provided we could get ourselves to think
of illegal surgery as an offense requiring “forcible compulsion,” and to think of “nonconsent” in this context as revulsion, aversion, or a clearly crystallized negative attitude.

We do not see matters this way because we are not thinking about a crime of violence. We are thinking about an offense against the patient’s autonomy. . . . Nonconsent is simply anything that is not . . . an affirmative, crystallized ex-
pression of willingness. To treat the athlete as a victim is not, of course, to patronize him. It is merely to recognize an obvious violation of the physical autonomy of his person.2
MICHELLE J. ANDERSON, NEGOTIATING SEX, 78 S. CAL. L. REV. 1401, 1406 (2005): [Reforms requiring affirmative permission, by words or conduct, do not go far enough. That approach] relies on a man’s ability to infer actual willingness from a
woman's body language. Yet study after study indicates that men consistently . .. impute erotic innuendo and sexual intent where there is none. Any theory that relies on a man’s ability to intuit a woman's actual willingness allows him to construct
consent out of stereotype and hopeful imagination.

Moreover, [people often engage in petting instead of penetration in order to minimize the potential health consequences associated with penetration. Even if someone actively engages in “passionate kissing, hugging, and sexual
touching,” it would therefore not be . . . “sensible to infer actual willingness” to penetration [merely because of the absence of] a verbal objection. If two people are engaged in petting and one escalates the situation, mental dissociation and frozen
fright can occur, paralyzing the victim's ability to resist or say “no.” [T]he law [shJould require only what conscientious and humane partners already have: a communicative exchange, before penetration occurs, about whether they want to engage
in sexual intercourse.

4, Professor Dan Subotnik argues (“Hands Off”: Sex, Feminism, Affirmative Consent, and the Law of Foreplay, 16 S. Cal. Rev. L. & Soc. Just. 249, 294 (2007)) that requiring complete clarity in communication can be undesirable because
“the speed of the roller coaster is central to the experience” and because “talking may damage romantic relationships.” Do you agree? If there is intense social disagreement on such an issue, is it wrong for the criminal law to prefer one side over
the other? Or — if the conduct risks serious harm — is it all the more important for it to do so?

Can objections to requiring affirmative consent be met by assessing consent on a “contextual” basis, considering both action and inaction under all the circumstances? Compare Schulhofer, p. 422 n.52, supra, at 668-681, with Gruber,
p. 422 supra, at 695-707.

p.426
p.426
NOTES ON DEFECTIVE CONSENT

When is consent “freely given” within the meaning of M.T.S. and the Wisconsin statute (p. 391, supra)? When is it “voluntary” within the meaning of the Florida statute (p. 416, supra note 43)? When does a person lack the capacity to
give valid consent? Consider the following issues.

1. Maturity. With respect to youth, statutes always draw a bright line, setting a specific age of consent. This form of rape (“statutory rape”) reflects a combination of concerns, including not only the young person’s capacity to make a
mature decision, but also (1) the social goal of deterring teen pregnancy and (2) the risk of implicit coercion, especially when one party is older than the other. Reflecting this last concern, many statutory rape provisions apply only when the perpe-
trator is several years older than the minor victim. See Michele Goodwin, Law's Limits: Regulating Statutory Rape Law, 2013 Wis. L. Rev. 481.

Intellectual disability is more difficult to define. See Jasmine E. Harris, Sexual Consent and Disability, 93 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 480 (2018). In several states the test, not further explained, is simply whether the person concerned was “incapable
of giving consent.” See MPC Tentative Draft No. 5, at 192-194. A common problem under virtually all American statutes is the need to set a standard that protects vulnerable victims from exploitation, without making it illegal for them ever to have
fulfilling sexual relationships. See Deborah W. Denno, Sexuality, Rape, and Mental Retardation, 1997 U. Ill. L. Rev. 315. The MPC seeks to address this dilemma by imposing liability only when “the actor has no similarly serious disability.” MPC
§213.3(2)(b)(), in the Appendix in this book. Is this an acceptable solution? Does it place too great a limit on who can be a sexual partner of someone with an intellectual disability? Conversely, does it leave too much room for exploitation of people
with significant vulnerabilities?

2. Incapacity — drugs and alcohol. All states impose liability for rape when a defendant has intercourse with a person who was completely unconscious. Similarly, nearly all states impose liability when the defendant has intercourse
with a person who — though not completely unconscious — was severely incapacitated by drugs or alcohol that the defendant secretly administered. But many rape statutes do not impose liability when victims are just barely conscious as a result
of alcohol they themselves chose to consume. Yet heavy drinking, in combination with inexperience with both sex and alcohol, is a major factor in sexual overreaching and sexual abuse, on college campuses and elsewhere. See Karen M. Kramer,
Rule by Myth: The Social and Legal Dynamics Governing Alcohol-Related Acquaintance Rapes, 47 Stan. L. Rev. 115 (1994). One analysis found that “in student populations, up to 81% of incidents can involve drinking on the part of the victim.”
Sharon Cowan, The Trouble with Drink: Intoxication, (In)capacity, and the Evaporation of Consent to Sex, 41 Akron. L. Rev. 899, 904-905 (2008).

In State v. Haddock, 664 S.E.2d 339 (N.C. Ct. App. 2008), the victim, after drinking heavily during a New Year's Eve celebration, accompanied the defendant to his apartment and collapsed on his bed, where he then had intercourse with
her. He was convicted of rape under a statute prohibiting intercourse with a person “who, due to any act committed upon the victim is rendered substantially incapable of either appraising the nature of his or her conduct, or of resisting the act.” Id.
at 345. The court held that the statute was not “intended for the protection

p.426

p.427
of . .. alleged victims who have voluntarily ingested intoxicating substances.” Id. at 346. Because the incapacity was not caused by the defendant himself, the court reversed the conviction. Most states impose a similar restriction. See Lori E.
Shaw, Title IX, Sexual Assault, and the Issue of Effective Consent: Blurred Lines — When Should “Yes” Mean “No”?, 91 Ind. Lu. 1363, 1414-1415 (2016). Is the idea that the victim's willingness to drink should be equated with consent to have sex?
Oris it that a person's willingness to drink forfeits protection against nonconsensual sex? A different kind of concern could be that defendants in these situations may have difficulty assessing how drunk the other person is. If so, should that con-
cern also limit a defendant's liability in situations where the other person's drink was spiked, without their knowledge, by a third party?

Several states address the risks of abuse in these situations by providing that even voluntary intoxication can negate consent. Patricia J. Falk, Rape by Drugs: A Statutory Overview and Proposals for Reform, 44 Ariz. L. Rev. 131, 173
(2002). How should incapacity be defined in that context? In Massachusetts the test simply asks, not very helpfully, whether “the complainant was so impaired as to be incapable of consenting.” Commonwealth v. Bache, 880 N.E.2d 736, 743 n.14
(Mass. 2008). The Kansas courts let the jury reach its own judgment, reasoning that “Jay persons are familiar with the effects of alcohol.” State v. Smith, 178 P.3d 672, 877 (Kan. Ct. App. 2008). Is that the best a court can do, or is it unduly (and im-
permissibly) vague? Alternatively, should incapacity be defined by a bright line, such as the level of intoxication sufficient to render a person too drunk to drive (usually a blood-alcohol level of 0.1 or 0.08)?

Professor Christine Chambers Goodman argues that the best way to address the problem is to demand explicit consent. Goodman, Protecting the Party Girl: A New Approach for Evaluating Intoxicated Consent, 2009 BYU L. Rev. 57,
58. Because “[allcohol, like fear, can have an impact on a woman's ability to resist,” she argues that “silence never should be adequate to constitute consent when either of the parties has consumed alcohol.” Id. at 60. Professor Cole, however,
observes that people often chose to drink because they want to lower their inhibitions and hope the occasion will to lead to sex. He therefore proposes to limit liability to cases in which the level of intoxication is “extreme.” Kevin Cole, Sex and the
Single Malt Girl: How Voluntary Intoxication Affects Consent, 78 Mont. L. Rev. 155 (2017).

The MPC addresses this problem from two directions. See §§213.3, 213.6, in the Appendix in this book. Section 213.3(2)(b) punishes the actor who engages in sexual penetration or oral sex with a person who is “passing in and out of
consciousness,” regardless of whether the victim consumed the intoxicant voluntarily. And even when that section does not apply, §213.6 punishes sexual assault in the absence of consent. Bearing in mind that sexual overreaching is especially
common and especially problematic in situations affected by heavy drinking, does the MPC propose an adequate solution? Do you see any shortcomings?

Professor Buchhandler-Raphael argues that the MPC approach does not go far enough, because heavily intoxicated victims can be incapable of authentic consent well before they reach a state of “passing in and out of conscious-
ness.” She argues that intoxication should invalidate the apparent consent of “a passive and unresponsive person whose ability to communicate nonconsent was significantly impaired due to intoxication.” Michal Buchhandler-Raphael, The Co-
nundrum of Voluntary Intoxication and Sex, 82 Brook. L. Rev. 1031, 1036 (2017). Do you agree, or does this approach risk extending criminal liability too far?

p.427
p.428

3. Implicit pressure. If employee E sleeps with supervisor S because S threatened to block E’s promotion, $ could be guilty of a sexual offense under the MPC (see §213.4, in the Appendix in this book) and under similar state statutes.
See pp. 408-409 supra. But what if E sleeps with S because S simply suggests that they spend lunch hours together at a motel, and E, who badly needs the job, does not feel free to reject S’s advances? In states such as New Jersey and Wiscon-
sin, where consent must be “freely given,” is that a case of valid consent or a case of criminal sexual assault? If S knows that E submits only because E cannot afford to incur S’s ire, should S be guilty of a sexual offense?

Should the criminal law prohibit, as inherently coercive, any sexual relationship between a job supervisor and a subordinate? Consider this observation:4

[S]exual autonomy is two sided, consisting of both the freedom from unwanted sex and the freedom to have a wanted intimate relationship with another person who is also willing. Indeed, the need for intimacy is fundamen-

tal... . Were that not the case, the protection of sexual autonomy would be a simple matter, for we could simply prohibit all sexual encounters in the absence of a fully informed, freely chosen agreement between parties who

are in every sense social and economic equals. But a rule of that sort, vigorously protecting . . . our negative sexual autonomy (the freedom from unwanted sex), would have a devastating impact on our positive sexual auton-

‘omy (the freedom to pursue a sexual relationship that is mutually desired).

4, Authority and trust. Is a patient in psychotherapy capable of giving valid consent to the sexual advances of the patient’s psychiatrist? Such relationships violate medical ethics, but some types of mental health professionals and
marriage counselors are not governed by similar rules of professional ethics. And in many states such sexual relationships are not illegal. Should they be? Does criminal law overreach if it assumes that an adult patient being treated for anxiety or
depression is inherently incapable of giving valid consent? Or are the risks to the patient and the constraints on the patient’s ability to say “no” simply too great?

Outside the context of psychiatrist-patient relationships, criminal law generally does not invalidate consent in adult relationships, even when they are strongly influenced by authority or trust. See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Unwanted Sex
168-253 (1998); Patricia J. Falk, Rape by Fraud and Rape by Coercion, 64 Brook. L. Rev. 39, 89-132 (1998). Are there areas in which that approach is no longer justifiable? For example, should the law prohibit, on grounds of potentially coerced or
inauthentic consent, a sexual relationship between a divorce lawyer and client? Or between a teacher and student?

For a proposal to prohibit abuse of power in sexual relationships on the job and in academic settings, see Michal Buchhandler-Raphael, Criminalizing Coerced Submission in the Workplace and in the Academy, 19 Colum. J. Gender &
L. 409

p.428
p.429
(2010). In the most ambitious effort in this direction, Professor Catharine MacKinnon contends that the law of rape should prohibit “all the forms of force that someone, usually a man, deploys to coerce sex on someone with less power than he
has . . . including circumstances of social coercion.” MacKinnon, Rape Redefined, 10 Harv. L. & Pol’y Rev. 431, 469 (2016).
QUESTIONS: How could statutory language be cast to realize this approach? Should “social coercion” be defined more specifically, or should the presence of social coercion and other situational force be left for common-sense determination by
the jury?

3. Deception
People v. Evans

‘Supreme Court, New York County, Trial Term
379 N.Y.S.2d 912 (1975)

GREENFIELD, J. The question presented in this case is whether the sexual conquest by a predatory male of a resisting female constitutes rape or seduction. [A] jury has been waived [and] the Court first makes the following findings of
fact:

The defendant, a bachelor of approximately thirty-seven years of age, aptly described in the testimony as “glib,” . .. met an incoming plane at LaGuardia Airport, from which disembarked L.E.P., of Charlotte, North Carolina, a twenty-
year-old petite, attractive second-year student at Wellesley College, an unworldly girl, evidently unacquainted with New York City and the sophisticated city ways, a girl who proved to be, as indicated by the testimony, incredibly gullible, trusting
and naive. [The] defendant struck up a conversation with her, posing as a psychologist doing a magazine article and using a name that was not his, inducing Miss P. to answer questions for an interview.

[T]he defendant invited Miss P. to accompany him by automobile to Manhattan, [and then he] and a girl named Bridget took Miss P. to [a singles’ bar], which the defendant explained was for the purpose of conducting a sociological
experiment in which he would observe her reactions and the reactions of males towards her. . . . After several hours there, . .. she was induced to come up to [the defendant's] apartment. .. . She had been there for one to two hours when the
defendant made his move and pulled her on to the opened sofa-bed in the living room . . . and attempted to disrobe her. [S]he was able to ward off these advances and to get herself dressed again. At that point, the defendant's tactics . .. changed.

First, he informed her of his disappointment that she had failed the test, that this was all part of his psychological experiment, that, in fact, this was a way in which he was trying to reach her innermost consciousness. [Then,] he took
steps to cause doubt and fear to arise in [her] mind. He said, “Look where you are. You are in the apartment of a strange man. . .. How do you know that | am really a psychologist? . . .| could kill you. | could rape you. | could hurt you physically.”

Miss P. testified that at that point she became extremely frightened, that she realized, indeed, how vulnerable she was. . . . Then there was . . . an abrupt switch

p.429

p. 490
in which the defendant attempted to play on the sympathy of Miss P. by telling her a story about his lost love, how Miss P. had reminded him of her, and the hurt that he had sustained when she had driven her car off a cliff. Obviously, Miss P.’s
sympathy was engaged, and at that time acting instinctively, she took a step forward and reached out for him and put her hand on his shoulders, and then he grabbed her and said, “You're mine, you are mine.” There thereupon followed an act of
sexual intercourse, an act of oral-genital contact; a half-hour later a second act of sexual intercourse, and then, before she left, about seven o'clock that morning, an additional act. . .. The testimony indicates that during these various sexual acts
Miss P., in fact, offered little resistance. . . . Finally, at approximately seven a.m. Miss P. dressed and left the apartment. . . .

The question is whether having had sexual intercourse by the . . . means described constitutes rape in the first degree. The essential element of rape in the first degree is forcible compulsion. The prevailing view in this country is that
there can be no rape which is achieved by fraud, or trick, or stratagem. Provided there is actual consent, the nature of the act being understood, it is not rape, absent a statute, no matter how despicable the fraud, even if a woman has intercourse
with a man impersonating her husband . . . or even if a doctor persuades her that sexual intercourse is necessary for her treatment and return to good health. . . .

It should be noted that seduction, while not considered to be a criminal act at common law, has been made a criminal offense by statute in some jurisdictions. In seduction, unlike rape, the consent of the woman, implied or explicit, has
been procured, by artifice, deception, flattery, fraud or promise. The declared public policy of this state looks with disfavor on actions for seduction since the civil action was abolished more than forty years ago[,] there are no presently existing
penal sanctions against seduction. The law recognizes that there are some crimes [such as larceny] where trickery and deceit do constitute the basis for a criminal charge. . . . But of course, for a larceny there has to be a taking of property of value.
I do not mean to imply that a woman's right to her body is not a thing of value, but it is not property in the sense which is defined by the law.

It is clear [that] P. was intimidated; that she was confused; that she had been drowned in a torrent of words and perhaps was tetrified. But it is likewise clear . . . that the defendant did not resort to actual physical force. . ..

So the question here is . . . whether threats uttered by the defendant had paralyzed her capacity to resist and had, in fact, undermined her will. .. . He said, “. . .| could kill you. | could rape you. | could hurt you physically.” Those words,
as uttered, are susceptible to two possible and diverse interpretations. The first would be in essence that — you had better do what | say, for you are helpless and | have the power to use ultimate force should you resist. That clearly would be a
threat which would induce fear and overcome resistance. The second possible meaning of those words is, in effect, that — you are a foolish girl. . .. You put yourself in the hands of a stranger, and you are vulnerable and defenseless. The possibil-
ity would exist of physical harm to you were you being confronted by someone other than the person who uttered this statement.

Of course, it is entirely possible that Miss P. . . . construed [the statement] as a threat, even though it may not have been intended as such. . . . The question arises as to which is the controlling state of mind — that of a person who hears
the words

p. 490

p49
and interprets them as a threat, or [that] of the person who utters such words. It appears to the Court that the controlling state of mind must be that of the speaker. [T]his being a criminal trial, it is basic that the criminal intent of the defendant must
be shown beyond a reasonable doubt. . .. And so, if he utters words which are taken as a threat by the person who hears them, but are not intended as a threat by the person who utters them, there would be no basis for finding the necessary crim-
inal intent. . .. Since the Court, therefore, can find neither forcible compulsion nor threat beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant is found not guilty on the charges of rape, sodomy and unlawful imprisonment.

Now, acquittal on these charges does not imply that the Court condones the conduct of the defendant. The testimony in the case reveals that the defendant was a predator, and that naive and gullible girls like . .. P. were his natural
prey. He posed. He lied. . . . He used psychological techniques to achieve vulnerability and sympathy, and the erosion of resistance. A young and inexperienced girl like . . . P. was then unable to withstand the practiced onslaught. . .. The Court
finds his conduct, if not criminal, to be reprehensible. [Nevertheless,] the Court must conclude that the defendant's conduct towards Miss P. cannot be adjudged criminal so as to subject him to the penalty of imprisonment for up to twenty-five
years...

BORO v. SUPERIOR COURT, 163 CAL. APP. 3D 1224(1985): Ms. R., the rape victim, . . . received a telephone call from a person who identified himself as “Dr. Stevens” and said that he worked at Peninsula Hospital. “Dr. Stevens” told Ms. R. that he
had the results of her blood test and that she had contracted a dangerous, highly infectious and pethaps fatal disease. . .

“Dr. Stevens” further explained that there were only two ways to treat the disease. The first was a painful surgical procedure — graphically described — costing $9,000, and requiring her uninsured hospitalization for six weeks. A second
alternative, “Dr. Stevens” explained, was to have sexual intercourse with an anonymous donor who had been injected with a serum which would cure the disease. The latter, nonsurgical procedure would only cost $4,500. When the victim replied
that she lacked sufficient funds the “doctor” suggested that $1,000 would suffice as a down payment. The victim thereupon agreed to the nonsurgical alternative and consented to intercourse with the mysterious donor, believing “it was the only
choice | had.”

... Ms. R. ... went to her bank, withdrew $1,000 and, as instructed, checked into [a] hotel . . . 2 About a half hour later the defendant “donor” arrived at her room [and] had sexual intercourse with her. At the time of penetration, it was
Ms. R.’s belief that she would die unless she consented to sexual intercourse with the defendant: as she testified, “My life felt threatened, and for that reason and that reason alone did | do it.”

[Defendant was charged with rape “accomplished by means of force or fear of immediate and unlawful bodily injury,” Penal Code §261(2), and with rape “[w]here a person is at the time unconscious of the nature of the act and this is

p43

p. 492
known to the accused,” Penal Code §261(4). Conviction of either charge would carry a penalty of three, six, or eight years in prison. A pretrial motion to dismiss the former charge was granted by the lower court. Defendant challenged the lower
court's failure to set aside the latter charge.”]

The People's position is {that] “at the time of the intercourse Ms. R., the victim, was ‘unconscious of the nature of the act’: because of [petitioner's] misrepresentation she believed it was in the nature of a medical treatment and not a
simple, ordinary act of sexual intercourse.” Petitioner, on the other hand, stresses that the victim was plainly aware of the nature of the act in which she voluntarily engaged, so that her motivation in doing so (since it did not fall within the proscrip-
tion of section 261, subdivision (2)) is irrelevant.

[Als a leading authority has written, “if deception causes a misunderstanding as to the fact itself (fraud in the factum) there is no legally recognized consent because what happened is not that for which consent was given; whereas
consent induced by fraud is as effective as any other consent, . .. if the deception relates not to the thing done but merely to some collateral matter (fraud in the inducement).” (Perkins & Boyce, Criminal Law (3d ed. 1982) p. 1079.) ..

Another relatively common situation in the literature . .. is the fraudulent obtaining of intercourse by impersonating a spouse. . . . Some courts have taken the position that such a misdeed is fraud in the inducement on the theory that the
woman consents to exactly what is done (sexual intercourse) and hence there is no rape; other courts, with better reason it would seem, hold such a misdeed to be rape on the theory that it involves fraud in the factum since the woman's consent
is to an innocent act of marital intercourse while what is actually perpetrated upon her is an act of adultery. . . .

In California, of course, we have by statute adopted the majority view that such fraud is in the factum, not the inducement, and have thus held it to vitiate consent. [See Cal. Penal Code §261(a)(5), p. 389, supra]

[T]he Legislature well understood . . . how to specify certain fraud in the inducement as vitiating consent.‘ [A] concurring opinion in Mathews [v. Superior Court, 119 Cal. App. 3d 309 (1981),] specifically decried the lack of a California

statutory prohibition against fraudulently induced consent to sexual relations in [other] circumstances. . . .
The People, however, direct our attention to Penal Code section 261.6, which in their opinion has changed the rule that fraud in the inducement does not vitiate consent. That provision reads as follows: “In prosecutions under sections
261, 286, 288a or 289, in which consent is at issue, ‘consent’ shall be defined to mean positive cooperation in act or attitude pursuant to an act of free will. The person must act freely and voluntarily and have knowledge of the nature of the act or
p.492
439
transaction involved.” . . . If the Legislature at that time had desired to correct the apparent oversight decried in Mathews, supra,® — it could certainly have done so. But the Attorney General's strained reading of section 261.6 would render section
261, subdivision (6) meaningless surplusage. .. .

To so conclude is not to vitiate the heartless cruelty of petitioner's scheme, but to say that it comprised crimes of a different order than a violation of section 261, subdivision (4), [The charge of rape under Penal Code §261(4) must be
dismissed]

HoLMDAHL, J. [Section 261.6, defining “consent” applies in this case. It is apparent from the abundance of appropriate adjectives and adverbs in the statute that the Legislature intended to the point of redundancy to limit “consent” to
that which is found to have been truly free and voluntary, truly unrestricted and knowledgeable. [Whhile the Legislature in section 261.6 did not expressly repeal the legalisms distinguishing “fraud in the factum” and “fraud in the inducement,” its in-
tention certainly was to restrict “consent” to cases of true, good faith consent, obtained without substantial fraud or deceit. | believe there is a sufficient basis for prosecution of petitioner pursuant to section 261, subd. (4)... .

NOTES ON DECEPTION

1. A California “fix.” In 2002, almost 20 years after the Boro decision, California amended the provision at issue, §261(a)(4), to specify that victims will be considered “unconscious of the nature of the act” when they are “not aware...
of the essential characteristics of the act due to the perpetrator's fraudulent representation that the sexual penetration served a professional purpose when it served no professional purpose.” That fix would have produced a different result in Boro
but did not reach many other egregious frauds. Consider People v. Morales, 150 Cal. Rptr. 3d 920 (Ct. App. 2013). The victim went into her darkened bedroom to sleep while her boyfriend Victor and the defendant remained talking in her living
room. After Victor left, the defendant entered the bedroom and had sex with her, allegedly aware that she thought he was Victor. He was convicted of rape under the “unconscious of the nature of the act” test of Cal. Penal Code §261(a)(4). As in
Boro, the court reversed the conviction, holding (id. at 929) that “a person who accomplishes sexual intercourse by impersonating someone other than a married victim's spouse is not guilty of the crime of rape.” A few months later, the California
legislature again amended §261, this time to specify that fraudulent impersonation can support a rape charge whenever the victim “submits under the belief that the person committing the act is someone known to the victim other than the ac-
cused, and this belief is induced by any artifice, pretense, or concealment practiced by the accused, with intent to induce the belief.” Cal. Penal Code §261(a)(5).

439
494

Why did the legislature limit each of these fixes to such narrow circumstances? Should the law prohibit obtaining sexual consent by any material misrepresentation? See Russell L. Christopher & Kathryn H. Christopher, Adult Imperson-
ation: Rape by Fraud as a Defense to Statutory Rape, 101 Nw. U. L. Rev. 75 (2007).

2. The M.TS. test. How should Evans and Boro be decided under the M.T.S. standard, which permits a conviction for sexual penetration without “affirmative and freely given permission”? Is permission “freely given” by someone who
says “yes” only because of a deceptive inducement?

Professor Roseanna Sommers has conducted a detailed empirical investigation of how ordinary people assess the validity of sexual consent obtained because of false representations that were of great importance to the person giving
consent. For example, A is unwilling to pursue a sexual relationship with someone who is married; B knows this and therefore falsely claims to be single; A then consents to have sex with B. A clear majority of Sommers's research subjects viewed

4’s consent as valid, and the same held true for a variety of other “deal breaker” misrepresentations. Sommers found that “[t]he pattern is clear: sex obtained by deception is generally seen as consensual sex.” Sommers, Commonsense Consent,
129 Yale LJ. 2232, 2254 (2020).

Should the ordinary person's intuitions about the meaning of consent determine whether consent is valid as a legal matter in a prosecution for sexual assault? Courts typically hold that deceptive inducements invalidate sexual consent
only in the limited circumstances of a doctor convincing a woman to have sex as part of a supposed medical procedure or when a man impersonates a woman’s husband. Consistent with Professor Sommers's findings, there is generally neither
civil nor criminal liability when other false representations, no matter how material, are used to obtain sex. See Laurent Sacharoff, Trespass and Deception, 2015 BYU L. Rev 359, 390. Are there good policy reasons for this result?

3. Fraud in other contexts. In contrast to prevailing law with respect to sex obtained by deception, a person who obtains tangible property by material misrepresentation is universally held guilty of a criminal offense, usually theft or
fraud. See, e.g., MPC §223.3, in the Appendix in this book.

Why the distinction? Susan Estrich argues that respect for sexual autonomy requires that material misrepresentations invalidate sexual consent, just as they invalidate consent to a property transfer. Estrich, Real Rape 103 (1987). If our
laws don't consider the fraudster a rapist, does that judgment imply that our culture values sexual autonomy less than it values property rights? Professor Chiesa responds that “the chief goal of contemporary rape laws is to neutralize the coercion
inherent in sexual relationships that take place in a male-dominated society. [MJinimizing deception is only tangentially related to this goal.” Luis E. Chiesa, Solving the Riddle of Rape-by-Deception, 35 Yale L. & Pol'y Rev. 407, 410 (2017). Do you
agree? For other concerns, consider MPC Tentative Draft No. 5, at 245-248:

It is a truism that different rights often warrant different remedies. The boundaries of the right to control one’s property are not the same as those defining, for example, . . . the right to vote. Indeed, the law allows misrepre-

sentation in connection with efforts to obtain a person's vote that would be intolerable in connection with efforts to obtain that person's property. It does not diminish the right to control one’s sexual boundaries — or the

494
495
right to vote — to recognize that the safeguards attached to those rights may differ from each other and from the safeguards that protect property. [The issue] calls for discriminating judgment, sensitive to context... .
[Whatever logic might suggest about continuities between false promise to induce sexual consent and false promise to induce a property transfer, the] inter-personal dynamic is radically different in the two
settings. [Consider situations involving] an extramarital affair. Judged by the standards that govern property transactions in a fiduciary setting, disclosure [of the affair] would be obligatory, and any consent procured without
it would be a product of fraud. Yet the law surely risks dramatic overreach if it treats every instance of sex between spouses as a sexual crime when one of them has failed to disclose a sexual affair.
Similar difficulties arise even if criminal liability for sexual fraud is restricted to situations involving explicit (but false) denials of adultery. [T]he dishonesty is obviously central to the wronged spouse's continued

willingness to give sexual consent. Should the lying spouse be subject to prosecution for a sexual crime? Doing so would come close to re-criminalizing adultery. . .. [These and other] policy impediments to criminalizing sex-

ual fraud far exceed plausible concerns with criminalizing fraud in property transactions.

For further discussion of these issues, see Patricia J. Falk, Not Logic, But Experience: Drawing on Lessons from the Real World in Thinking About the Riddle of Rape-by-Fraud, 123 Yale L.J. Online 353, 357-359 (2013); Deborah
Tuerkheimer, Sex Without Consent, 123 Yale LJ. Online 335, 349-351 (2013); Stephen J. Schulhofer, Unwanted Sex 152-159 (1998).

D. MENS REA

Commonwealth v. Sherry
Supreme Judicial Court of Massachusetts
386 Mass. 682, 437 N.E. 2d 224 (1982)

[Three codefendants were charged with rape and kidnapping. The jury acquitted on the kidnapping charge and convicted of rape. Each defendant was sentenced to a prison term of not less than three nor more than five years. The
judge stipulated that only the first six months of the sentence was to be served, with the balance of the sentence suspended. Defendants appealed.]

Liacos, J. . .. The victim, a registered nurse, and the defendants, all doctors, were employed at the same hospital in Boston. The defendant Sherry, whom the victim knew professionally, with another doctor was a host at a party in
Boston for some of the hospital staff. .. . The victim was not acquainted with the defendants Hussain and Lefkowitz prior to this evening.

According to the victim's testimony, she had a conversation with Hussain at the party, during which he made sexual advances toward her. Later in the evening, Hussain and Sherry pushed her and Lefkowitz into a bathroom together,
shut the

495
p. 496
door, and turned off the light. They did not open the door until Lefkowitz asked them to leave her in peace. At various times, the victim had danced with both Hussain and Sherry.

Some time later, as the victim was walking from one room to the next, Hussain and Sherry grabbed her by the arms and pulled her out of the apartment as Lefkowitz said, “We're going to go up to Rockport.” The victim verbally
protested but did not physically resist the men because she said she thought that they were just “horsing around” and that they would eventually leave her alone. She further testified that once outside, Hussain carried her over his shoulder to.
Sherry’s car and held her in the front seat as the four drove to Rockport. En route, she engaged in superficial conversation with the defendants. She testified that she was not in fear at this time. When they arrived at Lefkowitz’s home in Rockport,
she asked to be taken home. Instead, Hussain carried her into the house.

Once in the house, the victim and two of the men smoked some marihuana, and all of them toured the house. Lefkowitz invited them into a bedroom to view an antique bureau, and, once inside, the three men began to disrobe. The
victim was frightened. She verbally protested, but the three men proceeded to undress her and . . . attempted intercourse. She told them to stop.‘ At the suggestion of one of the defendants, two of the defendants left the room temporarily. Each
defendant separately had intercourse with the victim in the bedroom. The victim testified that she felt physically numbed and could not fight; she felt humiliated and disgusted. . .

Some time later, Lefkowitz told the victim that they were returning to Boston because Hussain was on call at the hospital. On their way back, the group stopped to view a beach, to eat breakfast, and to get gasoline. The victim was
taken back to where she had left her car the prior evening, and she then drove herself to [her] apartment. . .

The defendants testified to a similar sequence of events, although the details of the episode varied significantly. According to their testimony, Lefkowitz invited Sherry to accompany him from the party to a home that his parents owned
in Rockport. The victim was present when this invitation was extended and inquired as to whether she could go along. As the three were leaving, Sherry extended an invitation to Hussain. At no time on the way out of the apartment, in the elevator,
lobby, or parking lot did the victim indicate her unwillingness to accompany the defendants.

Upon arrival in Rockport, the victim wandered into the bedroom where she inquired about the antique bureau. She sat down on the bed and kicked off her shoes, whereupon Sherry entered the room, dressed only in his underwear.
Sherry helped the victim get undressed, and she proceeded to have intercourse with all three men separately and in turn. Each defendant testified that the victim consented to the acts of intercourse. . . .

p. 496
497

The evidence was sufficient to permit the jury to find that the defendants had sexual intercourse with the victim by force and against her will. The victim is not required to use physical force to resist; any resistance is enough when it
demonstrates that her lack of consent is “honest and real.” The jury could well consider the entire sequence of events and acts of all three defendants as it affected the victim's ability to resist. ..

The defendants . . . contend that because the judge failed to give two instructions exactly as requested, the judge's jury charge, considered as a whole, was inadequate and the cause of prejudicial error. The requested instructions in
their entirety are set out in the margin.S ..

[The trial judge refused to give the requested instructions. He stated that the jury “should look at the acts of the defendants, [the victim's] responses to [those] acts, whatever words were used, examining the entire atmosphere, and not
look at [the case] from the point of view of the defendant's perceptions. . . .| don’t think that’s the law.”]

To the extent the defendants, at least as to the first requested instruction, appear to have been seeking to raise a defense of good faith mistake on the issue of consent, the defendants’ requested instruction would have required the jury
to “find beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused had actual knowledge of [the victim's] lack of consent” (emphasis added). The defendants, on appeal, argue that mistake of fact negating criminal intent is a defense to the crime of rape. ... We
need not reach the issue whether a reasonable and honest mistake to the fact of consent would be a defense, for even if we assume it to be so, the defendants did not request a jury instruction based on a reasonable good faith mistake of fact. We
are aware of no American court of last resort that recognizes mistake of fact, without consideration of its reasonableness[.] as a defense; nor do the defendants cite such authority. There was no error.

[In a companion case arising out of the same facts,” Justice Brown of the Appeals Court of Massachusetts commented as follows’] It is time to put to rest the societal myth that when a man is about to engage in sexual intercourse with
a “nice” woman “a little force is always necessary.” [W]hen a woman says “no” to someone|] any implication other than a manifestation of non-consent that might arise in that person's psyche is legally irrelevant, and thus no defense. Any further
action is unwarranted and the person proceeds at his peril. In effect, he assumes the risk. In 1985, | find no social utility in establishing a rule defining non-consensual intercourse on the basis of the subjective (and quite likely wishful) view of the
more aggressive player in the sexual encounter.

497
p. 498
Commonwealth v. Fischer
‘Superior Court of Pennsylvania
721 A.2d 1111 (1998)

Beck, J.:... Appellant, an eighteen-year-old college freshman, was charged with involuntary deviate sexual intercourse (IDSI), . . . and related offenses in connection with an incident that occurred in a Lafayette College campus dormi-
tory. The victim was another freshman... .

At trial, both the victim and appellant testified that a couple of hours prior to the incident at issue, the two went to appellant's dorm room and engaged in intimate contact. The victim testified that the couple's conduct was limited to
kissing and fondling. Appellant, on the other hand, testified that during this initial encounter, he and the victim engaged in “rough sex” which culminated in the victim performing fellatio on him. According to appellant, the victim acted aggressively
at this first rendezvous by holding appellant's arms above his head, biting his chest, stating “You know you want me,” and initiating oral sex.

After the encounter, the students separated and went to the dining hall with their respective friends. They met up again later and once more found themselves in appellant's dorm room. While their accounts of what occurred at the first
meeting contained significant differences, their versions of events at the second meeting were grossly divergent. The victim testified that appellant locked the door, pushed her onto the bed, straddled her, held her wrists above her head and forced
his penis into her mouth. She struggled with appellant throughout the entire encounter... . She also . . . repeatedly stated that she did not want to engage in sex, but her pleas went unheeded. According to the victim, appellant [said] “I know you
want it,” .. . and “Nobody will know where you are.” When the victim attempted to leave, appellant blocked her path. Only after striking him in the groin with her knee was the victim able to escape.

Appellant characterized the second meeting in a far different light. He stated that as he led the victim into his room, she told him it would have to be “a quick one.” .. . Thereafter, according to appellant, he began to engage in the same
type of behavior the victim had exhibited in their previous encounter. Appellant admitted that he held the young woman's arms above her head, straddled her and placed his penis at her mouth. . . . When she [said] “no,” appellant answered “No
means yes.” After another verbal exchange that included the victim's statement that she had to leave, appellant again insisted that “she wanted it.” This time she answered “No, | honestly don't.” Upon hearing this, appellant no longer sought to
engage in oral sex and removed himself from her body. However, as the two lay side by side on the bed, they continued to kiss and fondle one another. . . . According to appellant, the victim enjoyed the contact and responded positively to his ac-
tions. At some point, however, she stood up and informed appellant that she had to leave. When appellant again attempted to touch her, this time on the thigh, she told him she was “getting pissed” [and] abruptly left the room.

At trial, [appellants college friends testified that after the first encounter, but before the second, appellant showed them bite marks on his chest that he had received from the victim during the first encounter. Numerous character
witnesses

p. 498

p. 499
testified on appellant's behalf. Medical personnel testified to treating the victim on the night in question. Many of the victim's friends and classmates described her as nervous, shaken and upset after the incident.

Defense counsel argued throughout the trial and in closing that appellant, relying on his previous encounter with the victim, did not believe his actions were taken without her consent. . .. In light of his limited experience and the victim's
initially aggressive behavior, argued counsel, appellant's beliefs were reasonable. Further . . . as soon as appellant realized that the victim truly did not wish to engage in oral sex a second time, appellant stopped seeking same. As a result, appel-
lant's actions could not be deemed forcible compulsion.

The jury returned a verdict of guilty on virtually all counts. Appellant was sentenced to two to five years in prison. On direct appeal, he retained new counsel who has raised a single issue [ — ] that trial counsel provided ineffective
assistance in failing to request a jury charge on the defense of mistake of fact. Specifically, appellant claims that counsel should have asked the court to instruct the jurors that if they found appellant reasonably, though mistakenly, believed that the
victim was consenting to his sexual advances, they could find him not guilty. . . .

Counsel cannot be deemed ineffective for failing to pursue a baseless claim. Further, the quality of counsel's stewardship is based on the state of the law as it existed at time of trial; counsel is not ineffective if he fails to predict future
developments or changes in the law.

The Commonwealth relies . . . on an opinion by a panel of this court. Commonwealth v. Williams, 439 A.2d 765 (Pa. Super. 1982), concerned the rape and assault of a Temple University student. The facts established that the victim
accepted a ride from the appellant on a snowy evening in Philadelphia. Instead of taking the young woman to the bus station, appellant drove her to a dark area, threatened to kill her and informed her that he wanted sex. The victim told Williams to
“go ahead” because she did not wish to be hurt.

[Appellant there] argued, among other things, that the trial court erred in refusing to instruct the jury “that if the defendant reasonably believed that the prosecutrix had consented to his sexual advances that this would constitute a de-
fense. . . .” This court rejected Williams's claim and held:

. . When one individual uses force or the threat of force to have sexual relations with a person not his spouse and without the person's consent he has committed the crime of rape. If the element of the defendant's belief as

to the victim’s state of mind is to be established as a defense to the crime of rape then it should be done by our legislature which has the power to define crimes and offenses. We refuse to create such a defense.

Id. (emphasis supplied.) The Commonwealth insists that under Williams, appellant was not entitled to the instruction he now claims trial counsel should have requested.

In response, appellant makes two arguments. First, he argues that the “stranger rape” facts of Williams were far different from those of this case, making the case inapplicable. Second, he maintains that the law with respect to rape
and sexual assault has changed significantly over the last decade, along with our

p. 499
p.440
understanding of the crime and its permutations, making a mistake of fact instruction in a date rape case a necessity for a fair trial. ...

Although the rape and IDSI laws have always required the element of “forcible compulsion,” that term was not initially defined. [In 1995,] the legislature amended the sexual assault law by adding a definition for forcible compulsion:

“Forcible Compulsion.” Compulsion by use of physical, intellectual, moral, emotional or psychological force, either express or implied. . . .

Itis this broader definition, argues appellant in this case, that prompts the necessity for a mistake of fact jury instruction. .. . According to appellant: “The language of the present statute inextricably links the issues of consent with mens
rea. To ask a jury to consider whether the defendant used ‘intellectual or moral’ force, while denying the instruction as to how to consider the defendant's mental state at the time of alleged encounter is patently unfair to the accused.”

Appellant's argument is bolstered by the fact that the concept of “mistake of fact” has long been a fixture in the criminal law. The concept is codified in Pennsylvania and provides [18 Pa. Cons. Stat. Ann. §304]:

Ignorance or mistake as to a matter of fact, for which there is reasonable explanation or excuse, is a defense if . . . the ignorance or mistake negatives the intent, knowledge, belief, recklessness, or negligence required to

establish a material element of the offense; or the law provides that the state of mind established by such ignorance or mistake constitutes a defense.

. .. Courts in other jurisdictions have likewise held that jury instructions regarding the defendant's reasonable belief as to consent are proper.

Although the logic of these other cases is persuasive, we are unable to adopt the principles enunciated in them because of the binding precedent with which we are faced, namely, Williams. In an effort to avoid application of Williams,
appellant directs our attention to the Subcommittee Notes of the Pennsylvania Criminal Suggested Standard Jury Instructions. The possible conflict between Williams and §304 (Mistake of Fact) was not lost on the Subcommittee. . ..

In the opinion of the Subcommittee there may be cases, especially now that . . . the definition of force [includes] psychological, moral and intellectual force, where a defendant might non-recklessly or even reasonably, but

wrongly, believe that his words and conduct do not constitute force or the threat of force and that a non-resisting female is consenting. An example might be “date rape” resulting from mutual misunderstanding. The boy

does not intend or suspect the intimidating potential of his vigorous wooing. The girl, misjudging the boy's character, believes he will become violent if thwarted; she feigns willingness, even some pleasure. In our opinion the

defendant in such a case ought not to be convicted of rape.

. . We agree with the Subcommittee that the rule in Williams is inappropriate in the type of date rape case described above. Changing codes of sexual conduct, particularly those exhibited on college campuses, may require that we
give greater weight to what is occurring beneath the overt actions of young men and women. Recognition of those changes, in the form of specified jury instructions, strikes us an appropriate course of action.

p.440
p.4at

Despite appellant's excellent presentation of the issues, there remain two distinct problems precluding relief in this case. First [tJhis case . . . is not one of the “new” varieties of sexual assault contemplated by the amended statute. . . .
This is a case of a young woman alleging physical force. . . . We are keenly aware of the differences between Williams and this case. Most notable is the fact that Williams and his victim never met before the incident in question. Here, appellant
and the victim not only knew one another, but had engaged in intimate contact just hours before the incident in question. It is clear, however, that the Williams court's basis for denying the jury instruction was its conclusion that the law did not re-
quire it and, further, that the judiciary had no authority to grant it... .

In any event, distinguishing Williams on the basis of the parties’ previous contacts . . . is not enough to allow appellant the relief he seeks. Even if we . . . are persuaded by appellant's arguments chronicling the history of sexual assault
law . .., we face a second barrier. Because this appeal raises ineffective assistance of counsel, we are required to find that appellant's trial lawyer made a mistake. That mistake is the failure to ask the trial court for an instruction that the Williams
case held is unwarranted. In other words, we would have to find that counsel's failure to argue for a change in the law constituted ineffectiveness. This, of course, is not possible. . .. The relief appellant seeks represents a significant departure from
the current state of the law. Despite its compelling nature, it cannot be the basis for an ineffective assistance of counsel claim.

Judgment of sentence affirmed.

NOTE ON THE FISCHER CASE

Fischer was sentenced to two to five years in prison. Though reportedly he exhibited model behavior in prison, teaching English and math to people incarcerated with him, he was denied parole (consistent with normal Pennsylvania
practice with regard to those convicted of sex offenses) and served the full five-year term. At a meeting of the Pennsylvania Bar Association, Judge Phyllis Beck, the author of the Fischer opinion, commented that she found the case the most diffi-
cult and personally distressing of any she had decided that year.5°
NOTES ON MISTAKE AS TO CONSENT

1. Strict liability? Note that the defendants in Sherry did not seek acquittal on the ground that their alleged mistake was both honest and reasonable. In a subsequent acquaintance rape case, Commonwealth v. Simcock, 575 N.E.2d
1137, 1142-1143 (Mass. App. Ct. 1991), the trial judge not only refused a defense request for instructions on reasonable mistake but also told the jury (in a context where force was an element of the offense) that “a belief that the victim consented
would not be a defense even if reasonable.” The appellate court affirmed the rape conviction,

paar
p.4d2
stating that the result was “in harmony with the analogous rule that a defendant in a statutory rape case is not entitled to an instruction that a reasonable mistake as to the victim's age is a defense.”
QUESTIONS: Is the analogy flawed? Oris the court right in suggesting that defendants should be held strictly accountable for the existence of consent by their sexual partners? Does the answer depend on whether the law also requires a showing
of force?

In Commonwealth v. Lopez, 745 N.E.2d 961 (Mass. 2001), the Massachusetts court defended its refusal to allow any mistake of fact defense on the issue of consent; the court reasoned that the prosecution is in any event required to
prove that the defendant used force and that subjective culpability is therefore inherent in his actions. The argument poses two sets of questions:

(@) The factual claim. As a factual matter, is it true that subjective culpability is inherent in actions involving the use of “force”? Suppose that after the complainant went to the defendant's apartment for a drink, the defendant showed
off a collection of combat knives and then made sexual comments and sexual advances, after which complainant submitted to the defendant's sexual advances. If a jury finds the defendant's behavior implicitly threatening and sufficient to meet
the element of force, is it inevitable that the defendant will have realized that the victim perceived the actions as threatening?

(b) Pragmatic consequences. If courts feel that a finding of culpability is important, and if they are relying on the element of “force” to ensure that culpability is present, will they resist efforts to expand the concept of what counts as
force? If so, is it desirable to define the offense in such a way that the mens rea element is easy to establish, while the actus reus element of force remains relatively difficult to establish? Compare the approach of the European Court of Human
Rights in M.C. v. Bulgaria, [2003] ECHR 39272/98. The court held that European states must extend their definitions of force to encompass subtly coercive circumstances, but it also assumed that a conviction of rape requires proof of the defen-
dant's awareness that the victim felt coerced. Is this solution more protective or less protective of victims than the Lopez strict-liability approach?

The weight of American authority now runs strongly against strict liability on the consent issue, but a few states appear to have joined Massachusetts and Pennsylvania in opting for this approach. See, e.g., State v. Hernandez, 2010 WL
3119379 (Minn. App. Aug. 10, 2010); State v. Reed, 479 A.2d 1291 (Me. 1984).

2. Recklessness or only negligence? Most of the American cases permit a mistake defense, but only when the defendant's error as to consent is reasonable. See, e.g., Davis v. United States, 873 A.2d 1101, 1104 (D.C. 2008); State v.
Oliver, 627 A.2d 144 (N.J. 1993). See Robin Charlow, Bad Acts in Search of a Mens Rea: Anatomy of a Rape, 71 Fordham L. Rev. 263, 272-278 (2002). In England, in contrast, the House of Lords ruled that the prosecution must prove that the de-
fendant either knew consent was absent or was willing to proceed “willy-nilly, not caring whether the victim consents or no.” See Regina v. Morgan, [1976] A.C. 182:

Once one has accepted, what seems to me abundantly clear, that the prohibited act in rape is non-consensual sexual intercourse, and that the guilty state of mind is an intention to commit it, it seems to me to follow

p.4de
p. 443

as a matter of inexorable logic that . .. honest belief . . . negatives intent, [and that] the reasonableness or otherwise of that belief can only be evidence for or against the view that the belief and therefore the intent was actu-

ally held. . .. Any other view . . . can only have the effect of saying that a man intends something which he does not. . . .

Alaska is one of the few American jurisdictions to require proof of recklessness. See Hess v. State, 20 P.3d 1121, 1124 (Alaska 2001). In its leading decision on the issue, the court said (Reynolds v. State, 664 P.2d 621, 624-625 (Alaska
Ct. App. 1983):

Alaska has dispensed with any requirement that the victim resist at all. . .. Thus, the legislature has substantially enhanced the risk of conviction in ambiguous circumstances. . . . We are satisfied, however, that the legislature

counteracted this risk . . . by shifting the focus of the jury's attention from the victim's resistance or actions to the defendant's understanding of the totality of the circumstances. . . . No specific mental state is mentioned in

AS 11.41.-410(a)(1) governing . . . “consent.” Therefore, the state must prove that the defendant acted “recklessly” regarding his putative victim's lack of consent.2 This requirement serves to protect the defendant against

conviction for first-degree sexual assault where the circumstances regarding consent are ambiguous. . . .

3. The relationship between culpability and punishment? An individual convicted of rape, even under a strict liability or negligence standard, generally faces a substantial term of imprisonment, as well as mandatory sex-offender
registration, and identification on publicly available websites, often with a designation as a “sexually violent predator.” In some jurisdictions, conviction can carry a mandatory minimum term,®° and registration for sex offenses can be coupled with
strict prohibitions on certain kinds of employment and on residing near schools or parks. See Michael Vitiello, Punishing Sex Offenders: When Good Intentions Go Bad, 40 Ariz. St. L.J. 651, 667-674 (2008). Should the proliferation of these often
mandatory sanctions affect the acceptability of negligence as a sufficient mens rea on the issue of consent?

4. Victim consent in other crimes. Although victim consent is not a defense to homicide and other offenses involving serious bodily injury, consent in other situations can deprive conduct of its criminal character. See MPC §2.11, in
the Appendix in this book. Sexual contact is but one of many situations in which liability may turn on the consequences of a mistake about consent. Consider State v. Kelly, 338 S.E.2d 405 (W. Va. 1985). The defendant, a construction contractor,
removed oak

p. 449

p.4as
fireplace mantels from two unoccupied houses and sold the mantels to an antique dealer. Evidence suggested that the defendant had broken into the houses and torn locks off the front doors to gain access. He testified that a man named Bradley
had called, met him at the houses, and discussed tearing them down or salvaging their contents. After the defendant sold the mantels, he paid the $140 proceeds to Bradley and received $40 for his efforts. He also testified that a neighbor told him
that Bradley and his wife owned the houses. In fact, the houses were owned by Bradley's estranged wife, who had not consented to removal of the mantels. The defendant was convicted of larceny. The appellate court reversed:

[One who takes property in good faith... honestly believing he . . . has a right to take it, is not guilty of larceny, even though he is mistaken in such belief, since in such case the felonious intent is lacking. [As] summarized

in W. LaFave & A. Scott, Handbook on Criminal Law 638 (1972)... .: “[H]e lacks the intent to steal required for larceny, even though his mistaken but honest belief was unreasonable. . . . ” In this case [the evidence] does not

establish beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted with criminal intent because he believed that he had proper authority to remove the mantels.

QUESTIONS: If knowledge of the owner's non-consent is required for a larceny conviction, why shouldn't knowledge of the woman's non-consent be required for a rape conviction? Does the requirement that defendants be aware of the facts that
make their conduct wrongful flow from the essential character of conviction for any serious crime? Or does the need for that requirement depend on the particular kind of harm caused by failing to assure consent? Consider Andrew E. Taslitz, Will-
fully Blinded: On Date Rape and Self-Deception, 28 Harv. J.L. & Gender 381, 387-388 (2005): “[Mlale self-deception about whether a woman has consented . . . is morally worse than ordinary forms of criminal negligence.” Do you agree?

5. The practical effect of a negligence standard. Does the mistake-of-fact standard matter? Consider this comment:57

Given the [Sherry] victim’s isolation in an unfamiliar setting, her intimidation by three naked men, and her explicit protests, there could not possibly have been (from the feminist perspective) a reasonable mistake. For the

same reasons, however, one would have to say that these defendants actually knew that the victim was not consenting. . . . In other words, . .. these defendants were subjectively culpable and would be convicted whether

or not we insist on a negligence standard.

[But there] is one perspective from which these defendants might have made an honest mistake. That is the perspective that “no” does not really mean “no,” that women . . . just want to feign some initial reluc-
tance. . .. But if you hold this view of consent (and of women) . . . you might even conclude that the victim really did consent — that the [defendants] made
p.4as

p. 446
no mistake at all. Once one accepts this alternative (hopefully outmoded) conception of what consent means, the defendants could conceivably be acquitted even if they were tried under a strict liability standard.
The point here is not that choice of the mens rea standard can never make a difference. Certainly, conviction becomes progressively easier as we move toward the strict liability approach. But we are working at

the fringes of the problem. The [argument for a negligence standard] begs the most important question, or sweeps it under the rug of jury findings about reasonableness. This is really not a debate about mens rea standards.

Rather, it is (or ought to be) a debate about what we mean by the construct that we call “consent.” . . . The debate about mistake of fact standards diverts attention from the question of what it is that you have to be mistaken

about. Rather than requiring that the mistake be reasonable, and then leaving the jurors to their own conceptions of what is “reasonable” and what is “consent,” we need to spell out what the concept of consent means.

6. Limiting the reasonable mistake defense. Tyson v. State, 619 N.E.2d 276 (Ind. Ct. App. 1993), involved the prosecution of heavyweight boxing champion Mike Tyson for the rape of D.W., a woman who had agreed to accompany
him to his hotel room at 2 a.m. Tyson testified that D.W. responded positively to his kissing her on the way to his hotel, and that D.W. cooperated in the act of intercourse. D.W. testified that when Tyson made sexual advances in the room, she was
terrified, repeatedly objected, and unsuccessfully “tried to fight him.” The trial court refused to instruct the jury that a reasonable mistake as to consent would be a defense. Tyson was convicted of rape, and the court of appeals affirmed (id. at
295):

Tyson's description is a plain assertion of actual consent. . . . There is no recitation of equivocal conduct. . . . from which Tyson can logically argue that he misunderstood D.W.’s actions. . . . While [his] testimony would

negate an element of the crime [i.e., force] ] and challenges D.W.’s credibility, it does not support the giving of a mistake of fact instruction.

QUESTIONS: Is this approach sound? In cases involving this type of “swearing contest,” is it inevitable that one of the two competing stories must be completely true? What if the jury believes that both parties are exaggerating? State v. Barela,
349 P.3d 676 (Utah 2015), not only rejects the Tyson court's analysis but holds that it was ineffective assistance of counsel for the defense attorney to fail to request jury instructions on mistake of fact. See also Rosanna Cavallaro, A Big Mistake:
Eroding the Defense of Mistake of Fact About Consent in Rape, 86 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 815 (1996).

7. Applying a reasonableness standard. What factors determine whether a person’s mistake about consent was “reasonable”? Recall Michelle Anderson's observation (p. 425, supra) that “study after study indicates that men consis-
tently misinterpret women’s nonverbal behavior. They impute erotic innuendo and sexual intent where there is none.” Does this mean that men who make these mistakes are behaving reasonably (.., typically) or unreasonably (..e., unjustifiably)?

Judgments about reasonableness often depend on context, but it can nonetheless be helpful to focus on a simplified scenario. Consider these situations:

p. 446

(a) Ata college party, Morgan places a hand on the inner thigh of Tyler, a classmate. Tyler says “no, don’t” but does not push Morgan's hand away, and Morgan then commits an act of digital sexual penetration. Did Tyler consent? If not
(for example, when the rule is “no means no”), but Morgan mistakenly thought Tyler had consented, was that mistake unreasonable?

(b) At a college party, Logan places a hand on the inner thigh of Jordan, a classmate. Jordan remains passive, saying nothing, and Logan then commits an act of digital sexual penetration. Did Jordan consent? If not (for example, when
consent requires affirmative permission), but Logan mistakenly thought Jordan had consented, was that mistake unreasonable?

(c) Consider whether the answers to these questions should depend on background details, such as how well the parties knew each other or whether either Tyler or Jordan was drunk. For example, in case (b), if Jordan was perfectly
sober, can Logan reasonably interpret Jordan’s silence and lack of resistance as consent? Does the answer change if instead Jordan had been heavily drinking and, although still conscious, was unable to stand; in those circumstances would it still
be reasonable for Logan to interpret Jordan's silence as consent? On one view, it is unrealistic to decide on reasonable mistake without taking all contextual details into account. On another view, it is crucial to rely on bright-line standards like “no
means no” and “yes means yes,” precisely to avoid allowing the person who takes the sexual initiative to make assumptions that too often are inaccurate and self-serving. Which is the better view?

8. Evidence and implications. Differences of interpretation can be especially wide when there is neither a “yes” nor a “no” (as in Note 7(b), supra). But people's opinions also diverge when victims clearly do say “no.” In a 2009 study
ofa “date rape” scenario involving a victim who repeatedly said no but was sexually penetrated without extrinsic physical force, a diverse sample of 1,500 adults split sharply over whether there was consent and (if not) whether the defendant had

made a reasonable mistake. When these respondents were provided a legal definition that “no means no” and told “if [the man] knows that the woman has said ‘no,’ a mistaken belief that the woman consented is not a defense,” the percentage
willing to convict rose somewhat (from 57 percent to 65 percent). But even when given this instruction to apply the no-means-no standard, 35 percent of the respondents said they would find the defendant not guilty. See Dan M. Kahan, Culture,
Cognition, and Consent: Who Perceives What, and Why, in Acquaintance-Rape Cases, 158 U. Pa. L. Rev. 729, 764, 774-775 (2010). Do you think a similar study conducted today would yield the same results?

2015 survey of more than a thousand current and recent college students ages 17 to 26 found that 34 percent preferred a “Yes Means Yes standard, where both parties must clearly agree before engaging in sexual activity,” 42 per-

cent preferred a “No Means No standard, where sexual activity must stop if one person objects,” and 23 percent said that in practice there was not much difference — with virtually identical preferences among men and women.S=
p. 446
p.4a7

Do findings like these reinforce the view that people can make a reasonable mistake about consent if they initiate sex while their partner remains silent and does not ask them to stop? Or do such findings suggest an even greater need
for the law to treat such behavior as unreasonable, in order to prevent mistakes by guaranteeing that silence will not be misinterpreted as consent? Compare the following viewpoints:

DOUGLAS N. HUSAK & GEORGE C. THOMAS III, DATE RAPE, SOCIAL CONVENTION AND REASONABLE MISTAKES, 11 LAW & PHIL. 95, 123, 125 (1992): The social convention wcs? provides the vehicle through which M [a man] interprets the words
or actions of F [a woman]. [T]he evidence suggests a convention wes that might produce somewhat frequent mistakes of fact about a woman's consent. If so, and if the reformers succeed in restricting or eliminating the mistake-of-fact defense,
some men will be convicted of rape even though they had reason to believe that consent had been given.

Some might welcome this result. [O]ne might believe that it is more important to seek to change the social convention or to send a symbolic message than to do justice in an individual case. But if one believes that the criminal law
should seek to apply the just result in particular cases, men whose belief in consent is consistent with the social convention seem unlikely candidates for convictions of a serious felony. For this reason, legislatures should proceed slowly when re-
moving some of the common law barriers to rape convictions.

CATHARINE A. MACKINNON, FEMINISM, MARXISM, METHOD, AND THE STATE: TOWARD A FEMINIST JURISPRUDENCE, 8 SIGNS 635, 652-654 (1983): [MJen are systematically conditioned not even to notice what women want. They may have not
a glimmer of women's indifference or revulsion. . . . Men's pervasive belief that women fabricate rape charges after consenting to sex makes sense in this light. To them, the accusations are false because, to them, the facts describe sex. To inter-
pret such events as rapes distorts their experience. . . .

But the deeper problem is the rape law's assumption that a single, objective state of affairs existed, one which merely needs to be determined by evidence, when many (maybe even most) rapes involve honest men and violated women.
When the reality is split — a woman is raped but not by a rapist? — the law tends to conclude that a rape did not happen. To attempt to solve this by adopting the standard of reasonable belief without asking, on a substantive social basis, to whom
the belief is reasonable and why . . . is one-sided: male-sided.

E. THE MARITAL EXEMPTION
1 MATTHEW HALE, THE HISTORY OF THE PLEAS OF THE CROWN 629 (S. EMLYNED., 1778): [T]he husband cannot be guilty of a rape committed by himself upon his lawful wife, for by their mutual matrimonial consent and contract the wife hath
given up herself in this kind unto her husband, which she cannot retract.
par
p. 448
PEOPLE v. LIBERTA, 64 NY.2D 152, 474 N.E.2D 567 (1984): [At a time when the New York statute applied only to rape of a female “not married” to the perpetrator, the court of appeals held that distinctions based on marital status were irrational and
that the state's marital exemption therefore involved an unconstitutional denial of equal protection:] Lord Hale's notion of an irrevocable implied consent. . . is untenable. Rape is not simply a sexual act to which one party does not consent. Rather,

it is a degrading, violent act which violates the bodily integrity of the victim and frequently causes severe, long-lasting physical and psychic harm. To ever imply consent to such an act is irrational and absurd. . . . If a husband feels “aggrieved” by
his wife's refusal to engage in sexual intercourse, he should seek relief in the courts governing domestic relations, not in “violent or forceful self-help.” . . . Because the traditional justifications for the marital exemption no longer have any validity,
other arguments have been advanced in its defense. [I]t is not tenable to argue that elimination of the marital exemption would disrupt marriages because it would discourage reconciliation. [[]f the marriage has already reached the point where in-
tercourse is accomplished by violent assault it is doubtful that there is anything left to reconcile.

NOTES

1. The prevalence of marital rape. Marital rape is disturbingly frequent. Reliable statistics are difficult to obtain for any form of rape, but one study based on interviews with a random sample of nearly 1,000 women found that 14
percent of the women who had been married were the victims of at least one completed or attempted rape by their husbands. See Diana E. H. Russell, Rape in Marriage 57 (2d ed. 1990).

2. The harm of marital rape. The Model Penal Code, drafted in the 1950s, chose to preserve the marital exemption, in part for the following reason (Model Penal Code and Commentaries, Comment to §213.1 at 344-346 (1980)):

[The law already authorizes a penalty for assault. . . . The issue is whether the still more drastic sanctions of rape should apply. The answer depends on whether the injury caused by forcible intercourse by a husband is

equivalent to that inflicted by someone else. The gravity of the crime of forcible rape derives not merely from its violent character but also from its achievement of a particularly degrading kind of unwanted intimacy. Where

the attacker stands in an ongoing relation of sexual intimacy, that evil, as distinct from the force used to compel submission, may well be thought qualitatively different.

The notion that the harm of marital rape is less serious than that of stranger rape is forcefully criticized in Russell, supra, at 190-191, 198-199:

[Wife rape can be as terrifying and life-threatening to the victim as stranger rape. In addition, it often evokes a powerful sense of betrayal, deep disillusionment, and total isolation. . .. When a woman has been raped by her

husband she cannot seek comfort and safety at home. She can decide to leave the marriage or to live with what happened. Either choice can be devastating. [Staying usually means being raped again, often repeatedly. . .

A vicious cycle is set in motion that can lead a wife to suicide or madness.

p. 446
p.449

3. Institutional concerns. One possible justification for the marital exemption, according to the 1980 MPC Commentaries, supra, is that “[rJetaining the spousal exclusion avoids [an] unwarranted intrusion of the penal law into the
life of the family.” Critics forcefully challenge this assumption, arguing that it is the rape, not state intervention, that shatters the trust and harmony of the marital relationship. See vill Elaine Hasday, Contest and Consent: A Legal History of Marital
Rape, 88 Cal. L. Rev. 1373, 1487-1488 (2000). But others note that the potential for prosecution can override the victim's own preferences, cast doubt on her capacity to make valid autonomous judgments, and impose “de facto divorce” against
the wishes of both parties. See Jeannie Suk, Criminal Law Comes Home, 116 Yale L.J. 2, 66-68 (2006). In addition, because prosecution, even where possible, is rare,52 criminalization runs an especially high risk of discriminatory enforcement in
practice.

4, Legislative developments. Statutory reforms have substantially eroded the marital rape exemption. Roughly half the states, as well as the 2021 revision of the MPC, abolish the exemption entirely or retain it only to the extent of
exempting husbands from prosecution for statutory rape (i.e, the situation in which intercourse is consensual but the wife is under the legally prescribed age of consent). Nonetheless, nearly half the states retain qualified versions of the marital
rape exemption — for example, by prescribing a lower punishment for marital rape, or by permitting prosecution only when the husband has used the most serious forms of force. See Jill Elaine Hasday, Protecting Them from Themselves: The
Persistence of Mutual Benefits Arguments for Sex and Race Inequality, 84 N.Y.U. L. Rev. 1464, 1471 (2009); Michelle J. Anderson, Marital Immunity, Intimate Relationships, and Improper Inferences: A New Law on Sexual Offenses by Intimates, 54
Hastings L.J. 1465 (2003).

5. Judicial approaches. When state statutes do not explicitly require that the rape victim be “a female not his wife,” courts have some flexibility in determining whether the common-law marital exemption should remain a part of
contemporary law. Although defendants have argued that such a change in previously settled understandings should come only from the legislature, several courts have held that a marital exemption should no longer be read into their statutes.
See, e.g., State v. Smith, 426 A.2d 38 (N.J. 1981). England likewise abolished the marital exemption by judicial decision. R. v. R., [1991] 4 All E.R. 481.

A narrower approach is taken in Weishaupt v. Commonwealth, 315 S.E.2d 847 (Va. 1984). The court there abolished the marital exemption only for cases in which the wife had “conduct[ed] herself in a manner that establishes a de facto
end to the marriage.” (In Weishaupt the parties had been separated for 11 months at the time of the offense.) Does Weishaupt provide a workable compromise approach? If not, is a simple “living apart” test preferable? Or is preservation of the
marital exemption under any conditions fundamentally unsound?

p.449
450
F. THE DYNAMICS OF REFORM

Are the problems raised in the preceding sections best addressed by clarifying the criminal law and seeking to make its enforcement more effective? Or are law enforcement and the carceral approach the wrong places to look for
solutions? Can public discussion and education more effectively further the goals of reform, at much lower cost to the public and, especially, to the accused? Are restorative-justice models more promising, or are they fundamentally out of place
when an abuser commits an egregious sexual crime? Consider the materials that follow.

1. The impact of statutory revision. Most empirical studies find that reform efforts have had little impact on rape reporting, processing of complaints, and conviction rates. See Richard Klein, An Analysis of Thirty-Five Years of Rape
Reform, 41 Akron L. Rev. 981, 1030-1032 (2008). A detailed study of one of the nation’s most ambitious reforms found a Michigan statute relatively unsuccessful in extending the criminal prohibition to conduct previously thought to be permissible
or “borderline”; one law enforcement official dismissed the law's expanded coverage as “messing with the folkways.”®2 Another report analyzed data from six jurisdictions with widely differing approaches to reform, from the far-reaching Michigan
effort to relatively minor reforms in Texas and Georgia.©! The study found only small improvements in Michigan and virtually none in the other jurisdictions.°2 Researchers attributed these disappointing results to the wide discretion exercised by
criminal justice officials, who “continue{d] to use the informal norms developed in the courtroom work group to guide the processing of cases.”°° And there is considerable evidence that even when prosecutions are brought, juries still seem guided
by traditional assumptions about the importance of physical force and resistance.°4

2. The implications of de facto resistance to law reform. Do the findings described in the preceding Note suggest that legislative reform is bound to prove futile? One researcher observes that “passage of the reforms sent an
important symbolic message regarding the seriousness of rape cases,” and that “[iJn the long run this symbolic message may be more important than the instrumental change that was anticipated.”©° But if cultural change is the key to improving
attitudes and behavior, what is the best way to achieve it? Why should criminal law be the instrument for producing such change? From one perspective:®®

450
nnn 9 at

[An] important function of the criminal law is . . . to help shape [social] norms by communicating effectively the conditions under which commonplace or seemingly innocuous behavior can be unacceptably abusive or dan-

gerous. . . . Where deeply felt injuries are not yet fully appreciated by the general public, the criminal law may at times properly carry the burden of insuring that appropriate norms of interpersonal behavior are more widely

understood and respected.

In contrast, Professor Aya Gruber argues (Rape, Feminism, and the War on Crime, 84 Wash. L. Rev. 581 (2009)) that because of criminal law's harsh sanctions, reform efforts should reject the punitive approach and focus on changing
social attitudes in other ways. Professor Katharine K. Baker points to another pragmatic difficulty in relying on the criminal law (Why Rape Should Not (Always) Be a Crime, 100 Minn. L. Rev. 221, 222-223 (2015)):

Making consent the determinative factor in rape does little good if proving the absence thereof — beyond a reasonable doubt, no less — is all but impossible. . . . If behavior is not punished criminally because it cannot be

proved, then the public’s understanding of criminal behavior will not change. [In addition,] [t]ough-on-rapists measures enacted in the 1990s reflect an understanding of rapists as profoundly deviant and distinctly criminal,

[posing an additional obstacle to conviction in the context of male behavior that appears] commonplace and completely understandable given heterosexual scripts and norms of sexual pursuit.

Professor Donald Dripps proposes a way to make criminal law more effective, despite “the gap between elite and popular opinion”: Cases involving no consent but no physical force would be prosecuted in “a special sex-crimes court”
where non-jury trials would be constitutionally permissible because the court would not have authority to impose more than a six-month sentence. See Dripps, After Rape Law: Will the Turn to Consent Normalize the Prosecution of Sexual Assault,
41 Akron L. Rev. 957, 976-979 (2008). Is it appropriate — and effective — to use criminal punishment in this way, as a means to alter social norms that are prevalent in the community (or in substantial segments of it)? Or does it diminish the serious-
ness of the offense to limit punishment to the misdemeanor level in cases of nonconsensual sexual penetration?

3. Better remedies? The pitfalls of achieving victim safety and social change through the criminal law have led reformers to explore a variety of other remedies, including protective orders against the perpetrator, protection of the
victim's employment rights when a sexual assault occurs at work, college grievance procedures in cases that arise on campus, victim compensation funds, tort suits against perpetrators, and suits against third parties such as employers, universi-
ties, and hotel owners. See Carol Withey, Rape and Sexual Assault Education, 13 New Crim. L. Rev. 802 (2010); Michelle J. Anderson, Sex Education and Rape, 17 Mich. J. Gender & L. 83 (2010); Susan H. Vickers ed., Beyond the Criminal Justice
System: Our Nation's Response to Rape (Victim Rights Law Center 2003).

University campuses have become an important site for such efforts. By one estimate, roughly 1,400 colleges and universities have adopted policies against sexual assault that require students to obtain some version of “affirmative
consent” to

p.451

p.452
sexual activity,°7 and both New York and California require colleges receiving state funds to adopt and enforce affirmative consent requirements.©8 The U.S. Department of Education has been particularly active in these matters; the Department
does not require colleges and universities to use any particular definition of consent, but those receiving federal funds are expected to ensure that allegations of sexual abuse on campus are effectively investigated and remedied.°2 The theory
behind this requirement is that such abuse interferes with equal opportunity in education. See Michelle J. Anderson, Campus Sexual Assault Adjudication and Resistance to Reform, 125 Yale LJ. 1940 (2016). Professor Baker, supra, sees this as a
way to achieve more lasting progress, while also giving victims more control over the process than is possible in criminal prosecutions.

Yet these options pose problems of their own. Professor Gruber, supra, at 658 n.428, cautions that the various non-criminal alternatives are “not necessarily effective and can reinforce stereotypes and actually do harm.” College
disciplinary sanctions for sexual misconduct, though less harsh than most criminal punishments, can have severe, potentially life-changing consequences for an accused student who is found responsible. Accordingly, the need for procedural
safeguards and clearly defined standards of conduct is acutely felt.

Although some difficulties of the penal system can be avoided in campus disciplinary proceedings, others may simply be replicated in different form — or even aggravated. Partly as a consequence, the push to emphasize campus
remedies, as an alternative to the criminal process, has faced strong objections. See, e.g., Tamara Rice Lave, A Critical Look at How Top Colleges and Universities Are Adjudicating Rape, 71 U. Miami L. Rev. 377 (2017); Jacob Gersen & Jeannie
Suk, The Sex Bureaucracy, 104 Calf. L. Rev. 881 (2016); Tamara Rice Lave, Ready, Fire, Aim: How Universities Are Failing the Constitution in Sexual Assault Cases, 48 Ariz. St. LJ. 637 (2016).

Some critics insist that cases of sexual assault arising on campus should be handled only by criminal prosecution. Others emphasize that this approach can defeat the imperative to provide a prompt remedy for victims seeking to
pursue their education, especially when the assault occurs in the relatively closed setting of a campus community. In terms of faimess to the accused, which approach presents more reason for concern? For a lively debate on these issues, see
http://intelligencesquaredus.org/debates/past-debates/item/1402-courts-not-campuses-should-decide-sexual-assault-cases. From what you know of the penal system's advantages

p.452
459

for defendants (proof beyond a reasonable doubt, rigorous procedural safeguards when cases go to trial) and disadvantages (harsh sanctions, strong plea-bargaining pressure to waive formal rights), are campus disciplinary proceedings more
worrisome than the “gold standard” of due process afforded in criminal prosecutions?

4, Restorative justice/transformative justice. As in other areas of the criminal law, the imperfections and outright injustices that can arise in penal responses to sexual abuse — and the ways that campus adjudications and campus
sanctions can reproduce many of the same difficulties — prompt many observers to seek entirely different solutions.

In The Feminist War on Crime (2020), Aya Gruber argues that punitive responses to sexual violence have been dangerous and counterproductive, making victims less safe while contributing to “hyper-incarceration,” expanding the
power of police and prosecutors, and diverting resources away from marginalized communities. Donna Coker challenges the punitive logic implicit in the focus on individual culpability in both campus procedures and criminal law enforcement.
She advocates instead placing top priority on seeking to change the social conditions that foster sexual violence, through a public health approach combined with a variety of “restorative justice” and “transformative justice” initiatives. See Coker,
Crime Logic, Campus Sexual Assault, and Restorative Justice, 49 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 147 (2016).22

Coker argues that these approaches can “better meet the needs of some victims . . . and, in appropriate cases, are more likely to result in changes to the social environments that promote sexual assault.” Id. at 154. But in addition to.
acknowledging that these approaches are not appropriate for all cases of sexual violence, Coker cautions that these programs “may have a net-widening effect,” and that rather than serving as “a vehicle for changing structural inequalities of race,
gender, and class, “[restorative-justice] processes [can] reinstantiate those inequalities in their focus on one-time instances of criminal conduct.” Id. at 197.

Other victim advocates, even when sympathetic to restorative-justice approaches, nonetheless raise additional concerns. They note that these programs often lead to overt or implicit pressures on victims who are reluctant to partici-
pate, they question the adequacy of these approaches for assuring the physical and emotional safety of the victims, and they worry that poor women of color and other socially disadvantaged victims are most likely to be ill-served by these pro-
grams. See, e.g., Ruth Busch, Domestic Violence and Restorative Justice Initiatives: Who Pays If We Get It Wrong, in Restorative Justice and Family Violence 223 (Heather Strang & John Braithwaite eds., 2002).

In sum, non-criminal approaches hold promise, but they are by no means a panacea. Nor is it likely that they can entirely replace the criminal process, even in the context of less violent offenses and allegations of acquaintance rape.
The challenge therefore remains to ensure that the criminal process is, to the greatest extent possible, effective and fair to all concerned, including especially the complainant and the accused.

p.459
p.454
G. PROBLEMS OF PROOF
INTRODUCTORY NOTES

The preceding sections suggest some of the ways in which concerns about unfounded accusations of rape influenced the law relating to the required actus reus and mens rea. The same concerns have also influenced the law of
evidence, especially in two areas: requirements of corroboration and rules relating to cross-examination. The present section examines the first issue briefly (its interest is now largely historical) and the second, which presents problems of contin-
uing difficulty, in some detail.

1. Corroboration. At one time, most American jurisdictions imposed special corroboration requirements as a prerequisite for a rape conviction. In United States v. Wiley, 492 F.2d 547 (D.C. Cir. 1974), Judge Bazelon, concurring, ex-
plained the “tangled web” of rationales for these requirements (id. at 552-555):

The most common [concern] is that false charges of rape are more prevalent than false charges of other crimes. . .. It is contended that a woman may fabricate a rape accusation because, having consented to intercourse

she is ashamed and bitter, or because she is pregnant and feels pressured to create a false explanation, or because she hates the man she accuses or wishes to blackmail him. . . . There are, however, countervailing reasons

not to report a rape. One said to be a victim of rape may be stigmatized by society, there may be humiliating publicity, and the necessity of facing the insinuations of defense counsel may be a deterrent... .

In addition to the problem of false charges, the corroboration requirement is justified on the theory of Lord Chief Justice Hale [who wrote in 1680] that rape “is an accusation easily to be made and hard to be
proved, and harder to be defended by the party accused, tho never so innocent.” . . . Juries are said to be unusually sympathetic to a woman wronged, thus weakening the presumption of innocence. [But w]hat studies are
available suggest that . . . juries may be more skeptical of rape accusations than is often supposed. . ..

Still another basis for the corroboration requirement lies in “the sorry history of racism in America.” There has been an enormous danger of injustice when a black man accused of raping a white woman is tried

before a white jury. [Today, however, juries] are more integrated than in the past and racial prejudice may be at a somewhat lower level. Numerous rape victims are black and their interests, as well as those of white women,

may have been slighted by the concern for black defendants.

Although the treatment of rape victims has improved since the time when Judge Bazelon addressed the issue in Wiley, rape remains one of the most under-reported of the major crimes. See p. 381, Note 2, supra. For this and other
reasons, many scholars believe that concerns about false charges are wildly exaggerated. They argue that there is no more reason to impose heightened requirements of proof in prosecutions for rape than in prosecutions for any other offense.
Others, however, suggest that while rape might be under-reported by some potential

454

p. 455
complainants, it is over-reported by others. For review of the issues, see Corey Rayburn Yung, How to Lie with Rape Statistics: America’s Hidden Rape Crisis, 99 lowa L. Rev. 1197 (2014); David P. Bryden & Sonja Lengnick, Rape in the Criminal
Justice System, 87 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 1194, 1295-1315 (1997).

Currently, no American state requires corroboration in all forcible rape cases, but roughly a dozen states still require corroboration in limited circumstances, for example when there are material inconsistencies in a victim’s testimony.71
In support of the current consensus against requiring corroboration, see United States v. Sheppard, 569 F.2d 114, 118-119 (D.C. Cir. 197):

The corroboration requirement . . . foreclose[s] jury consideration of cases in which a highly credible complainant prosecutes charges, on the basis of her testimony alone, against a defendant whose account of the events

is clearly less credible. . . . Elimination of the corroboration requirement, however, hardly leaves defendants unprotected against unjust convictions. . . . Where the motivation of the complainant in bringing the charge is an

issue, . .. the defense attorney is free to emphasize to the jury the dangers of falsification, and the judge should instruct the jury as to those dangers. ..

2. Cross-examination and shield laws. (a) The issue of credibility. Consider Susan Estrich, Palm Beach Stories, 11 Law & Phil. 5, 14 (1992):

[Blecause it is all but impossible these days to argue successfully that no means yes, or that . . . stupidity as to consent should serve as a defense, men charged with rape . .. have few options but to argue the incredibility of

the woman victim. And the argument has appeal, I think, because many people . . . remain ambivalent about the expansion of rape liability: unwilling to continue to afford men the privilege of aggression, but also chary with

their sympathy for women who should know better. So the old myths of the lying woman are reasserted. . . . Today’s debate, on the radio, in the newspaper, and in the courtroom, is about when women should be believed —

and about what we need to know about the woman before we can decide whether to believe her.

(b) Abusive treatment of complainants. Until the late 1970s, a common defense tactic in rape prosecutions was to support a claim of consent by offering evidence of the complainant's “loose” reputation, provocative clothing, or
prior sexual experiences; the theory was that such evidence tended to make the claim of consent more plausible. In the words of an infamous early decision, jurors allegedly would “more readily infer assent in the practised [sic] Messalina, in loose
attire, than in the reserved and virtuous Lucretia.” People v. Abbot, 19 Wend. 192 (N.Y. 1838). Of course, the notion that a woman was likely to have consented to sex with a stranger, just because she was wearing “loose attire,” was far-fetched,
even by the social standards of the nineteenth century. But the test for the admissibility of evidence does not require that the evidence make the legally crucial fact (such as consent) likely

p. 455
p. 456

to be true. Instead, the ordinary rule is that background circumstances (including evidence like a complainant's prior sexual experience) are presumptively admissible, whenever the crucial fact (such as consent) is more likely to be true when
those circumstances are present than when they are not. See pp. 142-143, Note 2, supra. By this standard, it was considered plausible that evidence of prior sexual activity might sometimes have at least some probative value: For example, if the
complaining witness previously consented to sexual intercourse with a stranger shortly after they met in a bar, that fact might make it a little bit more likely (compared to a situation in which the complainant had never done so) that the complainant
consented to intercourse with this defendant shortly after they met in a bar.

Because a very slight increase in probabilities makes evidence “relevant,” under the rules of evidence, the most persuasive objection to admitting evidence of a complainant's prior sexual history usually is that any slender probative
value of this sort is outweighed by its prejudicial effects: First, such evidence can impair the truth-finding function at trial because its value may be over-estimated or because it may lead to confusion of the issues. Second, the very process of airing
such evidence can be painful to the victim, aggravating the injury of the original offense and deterring other victims from seeking prosecution. Many rape victims reported feeling that they had been raped twice — first by their assailant and then a
second time in the courtroom. See Vivian D. Berger, Man’s Trial, Woman's Tribulation: Rape Cases in the Courtroom, 77 Colum. L. Rev. 1 (1977).

3. Shield laws. Responding to such concerns, nearly all American jurisdictions have enacted “rape shield laws” to limit the admissibility of evidence bearing on a rape complainant's prior sexual behavior. For discussion of these
statutes, see Michelle J. Anderson, From Chastity Requirement to Sexuality License: Sexual Consent and a New Rape Shield Law, 70 Geo. Wash. L. Rev. 51 (2002); Berger, supra. Some of the statutes admit evidence of sexual history only when it
involves prior incidents with the defendant. Others allow additional exceptions to the rule of exclusion. See Harriett R. Galvin, Shielding Rape Victims in the State and Federal Courts: A Proposal for the Second Decade, 70 Minn. L. Rev. 763 (1986).

Some observers believe that even the most restrictive statutes do not go far enough in excluding evidence of the complainant's sexual history. For example, Michelle J. Anderson criticizes the blanket exception (in virtually all rape shield
statutes) for prior sexual conduct between the complainant and the defendant. See Anderson, Diminishing the Legal Impact of Negative Social Attitudes Toward Acquaintance Rape Victims, 13 New Crim. L. Rev. 644, 659-662 (2010). But does the
exclusion of such evidence interfere with the defendant's right to a fair trial? Consider the cases that follow.

State v. DeLawder
Maryland Court of Special Appeals
344 A.2d 446 (1975)

OrTH, C.J. ... DeLawder was found guilty by a jury . . . of carnal knowledge of a female under the age of 14 years. A 15 year sentence was imposed. The judgment was affirmed on direct appeal. [DeLawder then sought postconviction
relief]...

p. 456
p.457

In affirming the judgment on direct appeal, we held that the trial court did not err in [barring] questions attempting to show that the prosecuting witness had sexual intercourse with other men on other occasions. The general rule is that
because consent is not an issue in a carnal knowledge prosecution, evidence that the prosecutrix had prior intercourse with men other than the accused, or that her reputation for chastity was bad is immaterial when offered as an excuse or justi-
fication, and so is inadmissible for that reason. . . . The trial judge correctly applied these rules. . ..

As Davis [v. Alaska, 415 U.S. 308 (1974)] was decided subsequent to our decision, we must determine whether it affects the validity of DeLawder’s conviction. In Davis, the Supreme Court of the United States reviewed the reach of
the Confrontation Clause of the Sixth Amendment to the federal Constitution. . . . “Confrontation means more than being allowed to confront the witness physically. ‘{A] primary interest secured by [the confrontation clause] is the right of cross-
examination.’ ” “Cross-examination,” the Court observed, “is the principal means by which the believability of a witness and the truth of his testimony are tested...” ... The Supreme Court has recognized “that the exposure of a witness's moti-
vation in testifying is a proper and important function of the constitutionally protected right of cross-examination.” . ..

Davis was convicted of burglary and grand larceny . . . at a trial in which the court [prohibited] the questioning of Richard Green, a key prosecution witness, concerning Green's adjudication as a juvenile delinquent relating to a burglary
and his probation status at the time of the events as to which he was to testify. The motion was granted in reliance on a state rule and statute which preserved the confidentiality of juvenile adjudications of delinquency. . . . The defense made clear

that it [intended] to use Green’s juvenile record . . . only as necessary to examine him for any possible bias and prejudice. “Not only might Green have made a hasty and faulty identification of [Davis] to shift suspicion away from himself... ., but
Green might have been subject to undue pressure from the police and made his identification under fear of possible probation revocation.” The trial court rejected even this limited use of Green's adjudication. . . .

The [U.S.] Supreme Court did not accept this. It said: “On the basis of the limited cross-examination that was permitted, the jury might well have thought that defense counsel was engaged in a speculative and baseless line of attack on
the credibility of an apparently blameless witness. [T]o make any such inquiry effective, defense counsel should have been permitted to expose to the jury the facts from which jurors, as the sole triers of fact and credibility, could appropriately draw
inferences relating to the reliability of the witness.” It held that disallowance of the defense’s attempt to show bias . . . by cross-examination concerning the witness's juvenile record violated Davis's Sixth and Fourteenth Amendment rights.2. . .

DeLawder’s counsel made clear . . . that the defense strategy would be to discredit the prosecuting witness [by] proving that . . . she thought she was pregnant

p.457

p. 458
by someone else and claimed that DeLawder raped her because she was afraid to tell her mother she voluntarily had sexual intercourse with others. To show that she thought she was pregnant at the time of the alleged encounter with DeLawder,
it would be necessary to establish that she had engaged in prior acts of sexual intercourse. . ..

We cannot speculate . . . as to whether the jury... would have accepted this line of reasoning had counsel been permitted to present it fully. But . . . defense counsel should have been permitted to expose to the jury the facts from
which jurors, as the sole triers of fact and credibility, could appropriately draw inferences relating to the reliability of the witness. By being prevented from so doing DeLawder was denied the right of effective cross-examination. . . . We conclude, as
the Court concluded in Davis, that the desirability that the prosecutrix fulfill her public duty to testify free from embarrassment and with her reputation unblemished must fall before the right of an accused to seek out the truth in the process of de-
fending himself. ..

NOTES

1. Constitutional concerns. A number of courts have held restrictive rape shield statutes unconstitutional when they bar evidence of relevant sexual history, or have avoided the constitutional question by reading in a “catch-all” ex-
ception for evidence needed to preserve the defendant's right to a fair trial. E.g., Neeley v. Commonwealth, 437 S.E.2d 721 (Va. Ct. App. 1993).

2. The impact of shield laws. Though rape shield statutes have proved more porous than reformers initially expected, they have nonetheless had a major impact on trial administration. Empirical studies uniformly report that victims
are better treated in the judicial process and that efforts to limit the admissibility of sexual history evidence are largely successful.72

3. A changing need for shield laws? Since the 1970s, the frequency and acceptability of extramarital sex have changed dramatically. In 1977, 87 percent of Americans believed that extramarital sex was always or almost always
wrong; today it is commonplace. See I. Bennett Capers, Real Women, Real Rape, 60 UCLA L. Rev. 826, 876-877 (2013); Deborah Tuerkheimer, Judging Sex, 97 Cornell L. Rev. 1461, 1464 (2012); Mary D. Fan, Sex, Privacy, and Public Health in a
Casual Encounters Culture, 45 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 531, 537-543 (2011). In these circumstances, Professor Capers argues, evidence of a complainant's prior sexual history will tend to have far less prejudicial effect than in the era when rape shield
laws were initially adopted. Accordingly, he suggests, “rape shield rules [now may] do more harm than good{}] [it may be that] they have run their course and are no longer necessary.” Capers, supra, at 874-875. Others note that unfounded stereo-
types concerning women’s sexuality remain “alive and well.” Ramona C. Albin, Appropriating Women’s Thoughts: The Admissibility of Sexual Fantasies and Dreams Under the

p. 458

p. 459
Consent Exception to Rape Shield Laws, 68 U. Kan. L. Rev. 617, 620 (2020). One study concludes that “enduring stereotypes and biases, along with pervasive underreporting and victims’ continuing apprehensions about mistreatment in the judi-
cial process, all support the ongoing need for some rape shield protections.”75

Are rape shield laws still needed, or are they obsolete? Consider the issue in the context of the problems that follow. In light of the sexual mores that are prevalent 49 today, how should we compare the prejudicial effects of a com-
plainant’s sexual history against its potentially legitimate probative value in these situations?

4, Problems. (a) In Commonwealth v. Harris, 825 N.E.2d 58 (Mass. 2005), a rape defendant argued that the complainant had consented to an act of prostitution and then accused him of rape as retribution for his failure to pay her full
fee. The defendant sought to impeach her testimony by offering evidence that she had a prior conviction for prostitution. The state's rape shield statute bars “[e]vidence of specific instances of a victim's sexual conduct” with persons other than the
defendant. Mass. Gen. Laws, ch. 233, §21B. But another statute authorizes the admission of a witness's prior conviction for purposes of impeaching the witness's credibility. Id. §21. Which of the two conflicting rules should prevail? The Massa-
chusetts Supreme Judicial Court held that the statute permitting impeachment use of prior convictions controlled and that the evidence of the complainant's sexual history was admissible. Apart from the question of statutory interpretation, what is
the best way to handle this problem? Does the prejudicial impact of casting the complainant as a sex worker outweigh the possible relevance of a prior conviction? Or does excluding the evidence unfairly impede the defendant's ability to present
a possibly truthful defense?

(b) In Neeley v. Commonwealth, 437 S.E.2d 721 (Va. Ct. App. 1993), the complainant, a 14-year-old white female, alleged that defendant, a young African-American male, climbed through her bedroom window in the middle of the night
and forcibly raped her. Defendant denied entering the house that evening. The prosecution introduced expert testimony that a hair fragment found in the complainant's cervix, though not positively identifiable as defendant's, was “characteristic
of hair from a person of African-American descent.” The defendant offered to prove that shortly before the alleged rape, the complainant had had sexual intercourse with her boyfriend and that the boyfriend was also African-American. A provision
of the state's rape shield law permitted the use of sexual history evidence when “offered to provide an alternative explanation for physical evidence of the offense charged which is introduced by the prosecution, limited to evidence designed to
explain the presence of semen, pregnancy, disease, or physical injury to the complaining witness's intimate parts. . . ” Because the defendant's evidence was offered to explain the presence of a hair sample rather than semen, it did not meet the
terms of this or any other statutory exception, and the trial court excluded it. On appeal, should the ruling be upheld? Or, as applied to these facts, is the statutory exclusion unconstitutional?

(©) The defendant was charged with forcing his former girlfriend to have sex simultaneously with him and one of his friends. He claimed consent, and in an effort to make the defense credible, he sought to introduce evidence that on

p.459

p. 460
previous occasions she had willingly engaged in sexual acts involving multiple partners. Is that evidence unduly prejudicial? Or would excluding it deny the defendant the opportunity for a fair trial on his defense of consent? See Gagne v. Booker,
606 F.3d 278 (6th Cir. 2010); Tuerkheimer, Note 3, supra.

5. Prior behavior of the defendant. A general principle in the law of evidence is that evidence must be excluded, even when probative, if that probative value is substantially outweighed by the evidence’s prejudicial effect. As an
application of that principle, facts about a defendant's prior misconduct ordinarily are not admissible to prove a propensity to engage in similar conduct on other occasions, for example to prove that the defendant was more likely to be guilty of the
current charge. Most jurisdictions apply the rule excluding evidence of a defendant's prior misconduct just as strictly in rape trials as in other kinds of prosecutions.

Is the willingness of courts to admit evidence of some prior sexual acts by a rape complainant inconsistent with the rule that precludes reference to prior misconduct by the defendant? In one highly publicized prosecution, William
Kennedy Smith was charged with committing a sexual assault upon a woman who had accompanied him back to his family’s vacation home, after drinking and dancing with him at a bar. The case turned on the credibility of the woman's testimony
that Smith ignored her protests and forced her to submit. Prior to trial, three other women came forward to allege that Smith had sexually assaulted them. The trial judge excluded this evidence, and Smith was acquitted. See N.Y. Times, Dec. 13,
1992, at B14. Was the ruling correct? If not, should the judge admit evidence of the prior sexual conduct of both Smith and his accuser? Consider Susan Estrich, Teaching Rape Law, 102 Yale L.J. 509, 519 (1992):

One [approach] is to say that we need symmetry: exclude all the evidence about both of them. That's the approach the judge followed in the William Kennedy Smith case. On the surface, it is neat and appealing. The only

problem is that it's a false symmetry. . . . [E]vidence that a man has abused other women is much more probative of rape than evidence that a woman has had consensual sex with other men is probative of consent. [T]he

mere fact that a woman has had lovers tells us almost nothing about whether she consented on the particular occasion that she is charging as rape. But won't we all look at a defendant differently if three other women have

also come forward to say they were abused? The danger with such evidence is not that it proves so little, but that it may prove too much. Symmetry won't get you out of this hole. . . .

|1, Jeannie Suk Gerson, The Trouble with Teaching Rape Law, Dec. 15, 2014, htios://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/trouble-teaching-rape-law. For the classic, In-depth discussion of the Importance of covering rape in criminal law classes, and the need to probe and challenge positions
on all sides in classroom dialogue, see Susan Estrich, Teaching Rape Law, 102 Yale L.J. 509 (1992), portions of which are excerpted at p. 386 infra. The history behind the introduction of rape into the criminal law curriculum is insightfully recounted in Jeannie Suk, “The Look in His Eyes": The Story of State v.
Rusk and Rape Reform, in Criminal Law Stories (Robert Weisberg & Donna Coker eds., 2011).

2. https://www.stanforddally.com/2017/05/04/rape-anxiety.

8. https://www.vox.com/2014/12/15/7871737 /rape-culture-definition.

4. httpy/wnmw.shakesville.com/2009/'1O/rape-culture-101 html,

5. https://jezebel. com/walking-while-female-a-story-of-sexual-assault-In-broa-6925786.

6 https://www.theatlantic. com/business/archive/2017/12/low-wage-workers-sexual-harassment/549158.

7. Caroline Kitchens, It's Time to End “Rape Culture” Hysteria, Time, Mar. 20, 2014.

‘8 RAINN Memorandum to White House Task Force to Protect Students from Sexual Assault, p. 2 Feb. 28, 2014), rainn.ora/imaqjes/03-201.4/WH-Task-Force-RAINN-Recommendations. pdt.

9. US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization, 2019, at 7 (Sept. 2020).

10. U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Rape and Sexual Assault: Reporting to Police and Medical Attention, 1992-2000, at 3 (2002).

11, http:/Anww.fbl.gov/news/pressreV/press-releases/attomey-general-erlc-holder-announces-revisions-to-the-uniform-crime-reports-definition-of-rape.

112 Criminal Victimization, 2019, supra note 9, at 3.

113, Patricia TJaden & Nancy Thoennes, Extent, Nature and Consequences of Rape Victimization: Findings from the National Violence Against Women Survey 7-8 (Natl. Institute of Justice 2006).

114, US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Female Victims of Sexual Violence, 1994-2010, pp. 1-6 (2019).

15, US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Criminal Victimization, 2014, at 1 (2016); U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, National Crime Victimization Survey — 2009, at 1, 2 (2010)

16. US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Female Victims of Sexual Violence, 1994-2010, at 1 (2019).

117, See Criminal Victimization, 2019, supra note 9, at 3.

118, Donna Coker, Crime Logic, Campus Sexual Assault, and Restorative Justice, 49 Tex. Tech L. Rev. 147, 164 (2016).

19, US. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Rape and Sexual Assault Victimization Among Gollege-Age Females, 1995-2018, at 1 (2014).

20. 1d,

21. Christopher Krebs et al., Campus Climate Survey Validation Study: Final Technical Report (U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2016), at 69.

22. An earlier survey estimated that “[olver the course of a college career — which now lasts an average of 5 years — the percentage of completed or attempted rape victimization among women in higher educational institutions might climb to between one-fifth and one-quarter.” Bonnie S. Fisher,
Francis T. Cullen & Michael G. Turner, The Sexual Victimization of College Women, at 10 (Natl. Institute of Justice 2000).

23, Heather Littleton et al, Sexual Assault Victims’ Acknowledgment Status and Revictimization Risk, 33 Psychol. Women Q. 34, 34 (2009).

24, Krebs et al, supra note 21, at 71.

25. Id. at 78, E-7; National Intimate Partner and Sexual Violence Survey: 2010 Findings on Victimization by Sexual Orientation 1, 10, 12 (Center for Disease Control, National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Division of Violence Prevention, 2010).

26. U.S. Dept. of Justice, Bureau of Justice Statistics, Sexual Violence In State and Federal Prisons — 2007 (2008).

27. Stephen J. Schulhofer, Taking Sexual Autonomy Seriously: Rape Law and Beyond, 11 Law & Phil. 35, 68 (1992).

28, Stephen J. Schulhofer, Unwanted Sex 15, 111 (1998).

29, See p. 1190 infra.

‘30. William Blackstone, 4 Commentaries on the Laws of England 210 (1765).

31, Md. Code, Crim. Law §8-304(a)(1) (2021).

‘8. California law authorizes additional years of imprisonment for rape in violation of this section when the victim is a minor or when the perpetrator has a record of prior similar offenses. The punishment increases to lie imprisonment in cases involving severe aggravating circumstances (e.g., kid-
napping, torture, or use of a deadly weapon). Cal. Penal Code §§667.6, 667.61. — EDS.

'b, The offense drops to a misdemeanor, with a one-year maximum sentence, when the minor is not more than three years younger than the perpetrator. — EDS.
©. The offense rises to a Class B felony, with a 40-year maximum, if the act involves intercourse with a child younger than 12 or ifthe act is committed by use or threat of force or violence. The offense is a Class A felony, punishable by life imprisonment, if the victim is under 13 and sutfers great
bodily harm. Under §948.093, the offense drops to a Class A misdemeanor (9-month maximum) under certain circumstances if the victim is at least 15 but younger than 16, and §948.09 punishes such conduct as a Class A misdemeanor when the actor is at least 19 and the victim is at least 16 but younger
than 18. — Eps.
d, The new text for Article 213, as approved by the ALI membership in June 2021, is expected to be formally issued by the ALI Council in January 2022. — EDs.
‘82, For the Califomia provision, see p. 368-389 supra. The Texas provision, effective Sept. 1, 2021, defines sexual assault, a felony of the second degree, as “intentional or knowing sexual penetration without consent,” but it defines consent under this provision as “compelliing] the other person to
‘submit or participate by the use of physical force, violence, or coercion; [or] by threatening to use force or violence against the other person or to cause harm to the other person.” Tex. Code Ann. §§22.011(a)(1)(A), (b)(1) & (2) (2021).
‘33, See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No. 5, at 268-270 (May 4, 2021); American Law Institute, Current State of the Law — Consent Only Offenses (July 2018).
a, The Maryland statute, now codified at Md. Code, Crim, Law §3-304(a)(1) (2021), was amended in 2002 to reach non-vaginal sexual penetration and to delete the requirement that penetration be “against the will” t continues to require that the defendant use “force, or the threat of force”:
‘A person may not engage in vaginal intercourse or a sexual act with another . .. by force, or the threat of force, without the consent of the other. ..
This offense, second-degree rape, Is punishable by up to 20 years’ imprisonment. First-degree rape, §3-303, for example where the defendant uses a deadly weapon, inflicts or threatens serious physical injury, is punishable by a maximum of life imprisonment. — EDS.
'b, Four judges joined the opinion sustaining the conviction. Three judges joined the dissent. — Eos.
‘34, See Model Penal Code Tentative Draft No. 5, supra note 33, at 111, 115-117.
‘35, See Louise Ellison & Vanessa E. Munro, A Stranger in the Bushes, or an Elephant in the Room?: Critical Reflections upon Received Rape Myth Wisdom in the Context of a Mock Jury Study, 13 New Grim. L. Rev. 781, 799 (2010).
1. First-degree sexual assault was (and is) punishable by not less than ten years’ imprisonment, with a maximum of lite. R.l. Gen. Laws §11-37-3 (2021). Second-degree sexual assault was (and is) punishable by not less than three nor more than 15 years’ imprisonment. R.l. Gen. Laws §11-37-5
(2021). — Eos.
‘5. General Laws 1956 §11-37-1 states in pertinent part: ...
(2) “Force or coercion” means when the accused does any of the following:
() Uses or threatens to use a weapon, of any article used or fashioned in a manner to lead the victim to reasonably believe it to be a weapon.
(i) Overcomes the victim through the application of physical force or physical violence.
(ii) Coerces the victim to submit by threatening to use force or violence on the victim and the victim reasonably believes that the accused has the present ability to execute these threats.
116. The dictionary definition of the word modicum is “a moderate or small amount.” Random House Unabridged Dictionary 1236 (2d ed. 1993).
116... .. [Even though defendant was the employer of the complainant and he was physically imposing as compared to her, he was neither a police officer, nor was he armed. . . .
10. [Nothing in the record] would have signaled to the jury the manner in which the complainant was using the term “rape.” [T]he element of force [is] not necessarily subsumed in the lay understanding of “rape” and is not even part of the legal definition of “rape” in other jurisdictions. The common
parlance understanding [of “rape"] cannot provide the jury with a sufficient basis to understand what the complainant meant when she used the term here.
‘36, People v. iniguez, 872 P.2d 1183, 1188 (Cal. 1994)
87. Kan. Stat. Ann. §21- 5503(e) (2021).
38, Affirmed by an equally divided court, 542 A.2d 1335 (Pa. 1988).
39. E.g,, Cal. Penal Code §261(a)(2) (2021), p. 389 supra.
40, See Model Penal Code Tentative Draft No. 5, supra note 33, at 225-229.
41, Brooks, who had no prior record, was sentenced to incarceration for 12 months on each of the blackmail and breach-of-privacy charges and 155 months (Just under 13 years) on the rape charge.
1. In the case of an adult convicted of this offense, New Jersey ordinarily would not permit suspension of the minimum five-year term of imprisonment in the absence of “extraordinary and unanticipated” circumstances. See State v. Johnson, 570 A.2d 395, 396 (N.J. 1990). — EDS.
11. The sexual assault statute, N.J.S.A.:2C:14-2c(1), reads as follows:
An actor is guilty of sexual assautt if he commits an act of sexual penetration with another person under any one of the following circumstances:
(1) The actor uses physical force or coercion, but the victim does not sustain severe personal injury; ..
(6) The victim is at least 13 but less than 16 years old and the actor is at least 4 years older than the victim,

[Sexual assault is punishable by a minimum of 5 and a maximum of 10 years’ imprisonment. When committed with a weapon or when “severe personal injury” is sustained, the offense is punishable by a minimum of 10 and a maximum of 20 years’ imprisonment. — EDS]

For example, if an actor pokes a finger in another person's face, that act would constitute a battery, even though the other person had not resisted and the actor had used no force to accomplish the result other than the force accompanying the act itself. — EDS.

»b. For example, in a case where a person surprised a woman by unexpectedly groping her and fondling her breasts, a requirement of extrinsic force would mean that (absent adaitional aggravating facts) such conduct could not be punished as a criminal sexual contact. — EDs.

42, E.g,, Mont, Code Ann. §45-5-503(2) (2021) life); Nev. Rev. Stat. §200.366 (2021) (Ife without possibility of parole); Utah Code Ann. §76-5~402 (2021) life).

43, Fla, Stat. §794.011(4)(), (6) 2021); La. Rev. Stat. Ann, §14:43 (2021). For New York and Wisconsin, see pp. 390-391 supra.

82, See, eg,, Jody Raphael, Rape Is Rape: How Denial, Distortion, and Victim Blaming Are Fueling a Hidden Acquaintance Rape Crisis (2013).

144, See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Preliminary Draft No. 6, at 66 (Sept. 8, 2015).

45, On the charging discretion of American prosecutors, see pp. 64-108 supra.

‘a, The court also held that McFadden was entitled to present a defense of mistake of fact with regard to the victim's consent. — Es.

46, Statutes and cases are sometimes unclear or inconsistent on this key threshold issue. For rigorous analysis of the concept of consent, see Vera Bergelson, The Meaning of Consent, 12 Ohio St. J. Crim. L. 171 (2014); Peter Westen, The Logic of Consent (2003); Alan Wertheimer, Consent to
‘Sexual Relations (2003); Kenneth W. Simons, The Conceptual Structure of Consent in Criminal Law, 9 Buff. Crim. L. Rev. 577 (2006).

47, Ralph Slovenko, A Panoramic View, in Sexual Behavior and the Law 5, 51 (R. Slovenko ed., 1965).

48, See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Tentative Draft No. 2, at 5-7 (Apr. 15, 2016).

49, In re JH., 2018 Cal. App. Unpub. LEXIS 7746, at "14 (Nov. 16, 2018)

550, State v, Jones, 2019 Haw. App. LEXIS 372, at 3°, "14, 433 P.3d 124 (Haw. Ct. App. 2019)

‘51, Consider Shari Motro, Scholarship Against Desire, 27 Yale J.L. & Hum. 115, 127 (2015): “During my first [sexual] experiences . .., was ‘going along’ more often than | ike to admit. ... | wasn’t coerced... . My ‘yes’ was clear. .., but it wasn’t always wholehearted.”

‘52, Stephen J. Schulhofer, Consent: What It Means and Why I's Time to Require It, 47 U. Pac. L. Rev. 665, 674-675 (2016)

53, MPC Tentative Draft No. 2, supra note 48, at 21. For a defense of this approach, see Schulhofer, Consent, supra note 52.

‘a, Compare Stephen J. Schulhofer, The Feminist Challenge in Criminal Law, 143 U. Pa. L. Rev. 2151, 2174 (1996): “It can hardly be fatal to the ['no means no' argument] to discover that women who say ‘no’ do not always mean the same thing, ... As with any default rule, the legal proposition that
‘no means no does not claim infallible accuracy; to the contrary, the absence of empirical consensus is [the reason why i's needed]. It presupposes ambiguity and seeks to allocate the risk of the inevitable misunderstandings.” — Eps.

For erticism of the suggested parallels between consent to surgery and consent to sex, see Stuart P. Green, Criminalizing Sex 85-86 (2020). — EDs.

‘54, Stephen J, Schulhoter, Rape-Law Reform Circa June 2002, 989 Annals N.Y. Acad. Sci. 276, 277 (2003).

‘2, Ms, R, was a relatively recent immigrant, and Dr. Stevens apparently had made a practice of targeting such people for his deceptive scheme. — EDs.

>, The defendant was also charged with attempted grand theft and burglary (entry into the hotel room with intent to commit theft). These charges were not challenged on appeal. — EDs.

4, Prior to its repeal [in] 1984, section 268 provided that: “Every person who, under promise of marriage, seduces and has sexual intercourse with an unmarried female of previous chaste character, is punishable by imprisonment in the state prison. .. ."

5. Its not difficult to conceive of reasons why the Legislature may have consciously wished to leave the matter where it lies. Thus, as a matter of degree, where consent to intercourse is obtained by promises of travel, fame, celebrity and the ike — ought the liar and seducer to be chargeable as a
rapist? Where isthe line to be drawn?

3, The victim testified that she was not physically restrained as they rade down an elevator with an unknown fifth person, or as they walked through the lobby of the apartment building where other persons were present.

‘2, The victim testified that when she asked the defendants why they were behaving in this manner, one of them replied, “Stop playing games.” — EDs.

8. “Unless you find beyond a reasonable doubt that [the victim] clearly expressed her lack of consent, or was so overcome by force or threats of bodily injury that she was incapable of consenting, and unless you find beyond a reasonable doubt that the accused had actual knowledge of [the
victims] lack of consent, then you must find them not guilty.”

“if you find that [the victim] had a reasonable opportunity to resist being taken to Rockport, Massachusetts, from the apartment... ., and had a reasonable opportunity to avoid or resist the circumstances that took place in the bedroom at Rockport, but chose not to avall herseif of those opportu-
nities, then you must weigh her failure to take such reasonable opportunities on the credibility of her claim that she was kidnapped and raped.”

b, Commonwealth v, Lefkowitz, 20 Mass. App. 513, 481 N.E.2d 277, 282 (1986). — EDs.

‘55, Interview with Jonathan L. Swichar, Esq., appellate counsel for Fischer, Nov. 25, 2001.

‘2, The court based this conclusion on an Alaska statute providing, as does MPC §2.02(3), that when a penal prohibition is silent as to the required culpability, the state must prove recklessness with respect to any specified circumstances or results. — EDS.

‘56. In New Jersey, for example, the required mens rea for sexual assault (the state’s statutory equivalent of rape) is negligence with respect to the element of non-consent, and conviction carries a mandatory minimum sentence of five years’ imprisonment. See M.S. p. 412, and p. 414 note 1
supra.

57. Stephen J. Schulhofer, The Gender Question in Criminal Law, 7 Soc. Phil. & Pol. 105, 132-133 (1990).

‘58. Washington Post-Kaiser Family Foundation Survey of College Students on Sexual Assault, p. 14, available at http://apps.washingtonpost. com/q/page/national/washington-post-kaiser-family-foundation-survey-of-college-stucients-on-sexuial-assault/1726. See also Nick Anderson & Peyton M.
Craighill, College Students Remain Deeply Divided over What Consent Actually Means, Wash. Post, June 14, 2015.

a, The authors use the term “wos” to designate the social conventions that women use to express consent to have sex. — EDS.

‘59, See Cassia Spohn & Katharine Tellis, Policing and Prosecuting Sexual Assault 142 (2014); Emily J. Sack, Is Domestic Violence a Crime?, 24 St. Johns J. Legal Comment. 535, 557 (2010) (noting that “prosecution remains infrequent, and conviction rates are low’)

60. Jeanne C. Marsh, Alison Geist & Nathan Caplan, Rape and the Limits of Law Reform 25-26, 42-49, 107 (1982).

61. Cassia Spohn & Julia Horney, Rape Law Reform (1992).

62. Id, at 86, 160, 173. The finding that Michigan conviction rates (as a percentage of indictments) remained constant can be viewed as a modest victory for the reform effort: More cases were coming into the system, and more were being indicted. The constant rate of conviction as a percentage
of indictments suggests the possibility that the new law facilitated conviction in grey-area cases that might not have been prosecuted before. See id. at 104.

63. Id. at 178.

64, See Stephen J. Schulhofer, Unwanted Sex 97 (1998); Andrew E. Taslitz, Wilifully Blinded: On Date Rape and Self-Deception, 28 Harv. J.L. & Gender 381, 405-406 (2005).

65. Cassia C. Spohn, The Rape Reform Movement: The Traditional Common Law and Rape Law Reforms, 39 Jurimetrics 119, 129-130 (1999).

66. Mode! Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Preliminary Draft No. 5, at 15 (Sept. 8, 2015).

G7. See Sandy Keenan, Affirmative Consent: Are Students Really Asking?, N.Y. Times, July 28, 2015.

68. Cal, Educ. Code §67386(a)(1) (2021) (requiring “affirmative, conscious, and voluntary agreement to engage in sexual activity”); N.Y. Educ. Law §6441 (2021) (requiring “words or actions [that] create clear permission regarding willingness to engage in the sexual activity”).

69. See Greta Anderson, U.S. Publishes New Regulations on Campus Sexual Assault, Inside Higher Ed, May 7, 2020, https://www.nsidehighered.com/news/2020/05/07/education-department-releases-final-title-ix-requlations, See also U.S. Dept. of Education, Nondiscrimination on the Basis of
‘Sex in Education Programs or Activities Receiving Federal Financial Assistance, 34 C.F.R. Part 106 (effective Aug. 14, 2020)

70. For exploration of restorative-justice initiatives more generally, see Chapter 1, p. 64 supra.

1, See Model Penal Code: Sexual Assault and Related Offenses, Discussion Draft No. 2, at 168 (Apr. 28, 2015)

2. The Court did not challenge the State’s interest [in preserving] the anonymity of a juvenile offender [but held that this interest] “is outweighed by petitioner's right to probe into the influence of possible bias.”

‘72, See Cassia Spohn & Julia Homey, Rape Law Reform: Grassroots Revolution and Its Impact 129 (1992).

7, Model Penal Code Discussion Draft No. 2, p. 455, note 71, supra, at 180.

p. 460
